President of Russia Vladimir Putin: Good afternoon,
Members of the Federation Assembly – senators, State Duma deputies,
Citizens of Russia,
This Presidential Address comes, as we all know, at a difficult, watershed period for our country. This is a time of radical, irreversible change in the entire world, of crucial historical events that will determine the future of our country and our people, a time when every one of us bears a colossal responsibility.
One year ago, to protect the people in our historical lands, to ensure the security of our country and to eliminate the threat coming from the neo-Nazi regime that had taken hold in Ukraine after the 2014 coup, it was decided to begin the special military operation. Step by step, carefully and consistently we will deal with the tasks we have at hand.
Since 2014, Donbass has been fighting for the right to live in their land and to speak their native tongue. It fought and never gave up amid the blockade, constant shelling and the Kiev regime’s overt hatred. It hoped and waited that Russia would come to help.
In the meantime, as you know well, we were doing everything in our power to solve this problem by peaceful means, and patiently conducted talks on a peaceful solution to this devastating conflict.
Behind our backs, a very different plan was being hatched. As we can see now, the promises of Western leaders, their assurances that they were striving for peace in Donbass turned out to be a sham and outright lies. They were simply marking time, engaged in political chicanery, turning a blind eye to the Kiev regime’s political assassinations and reprisals against undesirable people, their mistreatment of believers. They increasingly incited the Ukrainian neo-Nazis to stage terrorist attacks in Donbass. The officers of nationalist battalions trained at Western academies and schools. Weapons were also supplied.
I would like to emphasise that, prior to the special military operation, Kiev held negotiations with the West about the delivery of air-defence systems, warplanes and other heavy equipment to Ukraine. We also recall the Kiev regime’s vain attempts to obtain nuclear weapons; they discussed this issue publicly.
The United States and NATO quickly deployed their army bases and secret biological laboratories near Russian borders. They mastered the future theatre of war during war games, and they prepared the Kiev regime which they controlled and Ukraine which they had enslaved for a large-scale war.
Now they admit this publicly and openly, and they feel no shame about it. They seem to be proud and even to be revelling in their own perfidy, while calling the Minsk Agreements and the Normandy Format a diplomatic show and a bluff. It turns out that all this time, while Donbass was ablaze, while blood was being spilled, and while Russia sincerely made every effort to achieve a peaceful solution (I want to emphasise the word “sincerely”), they gambled on people’s lives, and in effect, were playing with marked cards, as they say in certain circles.
This appalling method of deception has been tried and tested many times before. They behaved just as shamelessly and duplicitously when destroying Yugoslavia, Iraq, Libya, and Syria. They will never be able to wash off this shame. The concepts of honour, trust, and decency are not for them.
Over the long centuries of colonialism, diktat and hegemony, they got used to being allowed everything, got used to spitting on the whole world. It turned out that they treat people living in their own countries with the same disdain, like a master. After all, they cynically deceived them too, tricked them with tall stories about the search for peace, about adherence to the UN Security Council resolutions on Donbass. Indeed, the Western elites have become a symbol of total, unprincipled lies.
We firmly defend our interests as well as our belief that in today’s world there should be no division into so-called civilised countries and all the rest and that there is a need for an honest partnership that rejects any exclusivity, especially an aggressive one.
We were open and sincerely ready for a constructive dialogue with the West; we said and insisted that both Europe and the whole world needed an indivisible security system equal for all countries, and for many years we suggested that our partners discuss this idea together and work on its implementation. But in response, we received either an indistinct or hypocritical reaction, as far as words were concerned. But there were also actions: NATO’s expansion to our borders, the creation of new deployment areas for missile defence in Europe and Asia – they decided to take cover from us under an ‘umbrella’ – deployment of military contingents, and not just near Russia’s borders.
I would like to stress –in fact, this is well-known – that no other country has so many military bases abroad as the United States. There are hundreds of them – I want to emphasise this – hundreds of bases all over the world; the planet is covered with them, and one look at the map is enough to see this.
The whole world witnessed how they withdrew from fundamental agreements on weapons, including the treaty on intermediate and shorter-range missiles, unilaterally tearing up the fundamental agreements that maintain world peace. For some reason, they did it. They do not do anything without a reason, as we know.
Finally, in December 2021, we officially submitted draft agreements on security guarantees to the USA and NATO. In essence, all key, fundamental points were rejected. After that it finally became clear that the go-ahead for the implementation of aggressive plans had been given and they were not going to stop.
The threat was growing by the day. Judging by the information we received, there was no doubt that everything would be in place by February 2022 for launching yet another bloody punitive operation in Donbass. Let me remind you that back in 2014, the Kiev regime sent its artillery, tanks and warplanes to fight in Donbass.
We all remember the aerial footage of airstrikes targeting Donetsk. Other cities also suffered from airstrikes. In 2015, they tried to mount a frontal assault against Donbass again, while keeping the blockade in place and continuing to shell and terrorise civilians. Let me remind you that all of this was completely at odds with the documents and resolutions adopted by the UN Security Council, but everyone pretended that nothing was happening.
Let me reiterate that they were the ones who started this war, while we used force and are using it to stop the war.
Those who plotted a new attack against Donetsk in the Donbass region, and against Lugansk understood that Crimea and Sevastopol would be the next target. We realised this as well. Even today, Kiev is openly discussing far-reaching plans of this kind. They exposed themselves by making public what we knew already.
We are defending human lives and our common home, while the West seeks unlimited power. It has already spent over $150 billion on helping and arming the Kiev regime. To give you an idea, according to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, the G7 countries earmarked about $60 billion in 2020–2021 to help the world’s poorest countries. Is this clear? They spent $150 billion on the war, while giving $60 billion to the poorest countries, despite pretending to care about them all the time, and also conditioning this support on obedience on behalf of the beneficiary countries. What about all this talk of fighting poverty, sustainable development and protection of the environment? Where did it all go? Has it all vanished? Meanwhile, they keep channelling more money into the war effort. They eagerly invest in sowing unrest and encouraging government coups in other countries around the world.
The recent Munich Conference turned into an endless stream of accusations against Russia. One gets the impression that this was done so that everyone would forget what the so-called West has been doing over the past decades. They were the ones who let the genie out of the bottle, plunging entire regions into chaos.
According to US experts, almost 900,000 people were killed during wars unleashed by the United States after 2001, and over 38 million became refugees. Please note, we did not invent these statistics; it is the Americans who are providing them. They are now simply trying to erase all this from the memory of humankind, and they are pretending that all this never happened. However, no one in the world has forgotten this or will ever forget it.
None of them cares about human casualties and tragedies because many trillions of dollars are at stake, of course. They can also continue to rob everyone under the guise of democracy and freedoms, to impose neoliberal and essentially totalitarian values, to brand entire countries and nations, to publicly insult their leaders, to suppress dissent in their own countries and to divert attention from corruption scandals by creating an enemy image. We continue to see all this on television, which highlights greater domestic economic, social and inter-ethnic problems, contradictions and disagreements.
I would like to recall that, in the 1930s, the West had virtually paved the way to power for the Nazis in Germany. In our time, they started turning Ukraine into an “anti-Russia.” Actually, this project is not new. People who are knowledgeable about history at least to some extent realise that this project dates back to the 19th century. The Austro-Hungarian Empire and Poland had conceived it for one purpose, that is, to deprive Russia of these historical territories that are now called Ukraine. This is their goal. There is nothing new here; they are repeating everything.
The West expedited the implementation of this project today by supporting the 2014 coup. That was a bloody, anti-state and unconstitutional coup. They pretended that nothing happened, and that this is how things should be. They even said how much money they had spent on it. Russophobia and extremely aggressive nationalism formed its ideological foundation.
Quite recently, a brigade of the Armed Forces of Ukraine was named Edelweiss after a Nazi division whose personnel were involved in deporting Jews, executing prisoners of war and conducting punitive operations against partisans in Yugoslavia, Italy, Czechoslovakia and Greece. We are ashamed to talk about this, but they are not. Personnel serving with the Armed Forces of Ukraine and the Ukrainian National Guard are particularly fond of chevrons formerly worn by soldiers from Das Reich, Totenkopf (Death’s Head) and Galichina divisions and other SS units. Their hands are also stained with blood. Ukrainian armoured vehicles feature insignia of the Nazi German Wehrmacht.
Neo-Nazis are open about whose heirs they consider themselves to be. Surprisingly, none of the powers that be in the West are seeing it. Why? Because they – pardon my language – could not care less about it. They do not care who they are betting on in their fight against us, against Russia. In fact, anyone will do as long as they fight against us and our country. Indeed, we saw terrorists and neo-Nazis in their ranks. They would let all kinds of ghouls join their ranks, for God’s sake, as long as they act on their will as a weapon against Russia.
In fact, the anti-Russia project is part of the revanchist policy towards our country to create flashpoints of instability and conflicts next to our borders. Back then, in the 1930s, and now the design remains the same and it is to direct aggression to the East, to spark a war in Europe, and to eliminate competitors by using a proxy force.
We are not at war with the people of Ukraine. I have made that clear many times. The people of Ukraine have become hostages of the Kiev regime and its Western handlers, who have in fact occupied that country in the political, military and economic sense and have been destroying Ukrainian industry for decades now as they plundered its natural resources. This led to social degradation and an immeasurable increase in poverty and inequality. Recruiting resources for military operations in these circumstances was easy. Nobody was thinking about people, who were conditioned for slaughter and eventually became expendables. It is a sad and dreadful thing to say, but it is a fact.
Responsibility for inciting and escalating the Ukraine conflict as well as the sheer number of casualties lies entirely with the Western elites and, of course, today’s Kiev regime, for which the Ukrainian people are, in fact, not its own people. The current Ukrainian regime is serving not national interests, but the interests of third countries.
The West is using Ukraine as a battering ram against Russia and as a testing range. I am not going to discuss in detail the West's attempts to turn the war around, or their plans to ramp up military supplies, since everyone is well aware of that. However, there is one circumstance that everyone should be clear about: the longer the range of the Western systems that will be supplied to Ukraine, the further we will have to move the threat away from our borders. This is obvious.
The Western elite make no secret of their goal, which is, I quote, “Russia’s strategic defeat.” What does this mean to us? This means they plan to finish us once and for all. In other words, they plan to grow a local conflict into a global confrontation. This is how we understand it and we will respond accordingly, because this represents an existential threat to our country.
However, they too realise it is impossible to defeat Russia on the battlefield and are conducting increasingly aggressive information attacks against us targeting primarily the younger generation. They never stop lying and distorting historical facts as they attack our culture, the Russian Orthodox Church and other traditional religious organizations in our country.
Look what they are doing to their own people. It is all about the destruction of the family, of cultural and national identity, perversion and abuse of children, including pedophilia, all of which are declared normal in their life. They are forcing the priests to bless same-sex marriages. Bless their hearts, let them do as they please. Here is what I would like to say in this regard. Adult people can do as they please. We in Russia have always seen it that way and always will: no one is going to intrude into other people’s private lives, and we are not going to do it, either.
But here is what I would like to tell them: look at the holy scripture and the main books of other world religions. They say it all, including that family is the union of a man and a woman, but these sacred texts are now being questioned. Reportedly, the Anglican Church is planning, just planning, to explore the idea of a gender-neutral god. What is there to say? Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.
Millions of people in the West realise that they are being led to a spiritual disaster. Frankly, the elite appear to have gone crazy, and it looks like there is no cure for that. But like I said, these are their problems, while we must protect our children, which we will do. We will protect our children from degradation and degeneration.
Clearly, the West will try to undermine and divide our society and to bet on the fifth columnists who, throughout history, and I want to emphasise this, have been using the same poison of contempt for their own Fatherland and the desire to make money by selling this poison to anyone who is willing to pay for it. It has always been that way.
Those who have embarked on the road of outright betrayal, committing terrorist and other crimes against the security of our society and the country’s territorial integrity, will be held accountable for this under law. But we will never behave like the Kiev regime and the Western elite, which have been and still are involved in witch hunts. We will not settle scores with those who take a step aside and turn their back on their Motherland. Let this be on their conscience, let them live with this – they will have to live with it. The main point is that our people, the citizens of Russia, have given them a moral assessment.
I am proud, and I think we are all proud that our multi-ethnic nation, the absolute majority of our citizens, have taken a principled stance on the special military operation. They understand the basic idea of what we are doing and support our actions on the defence of Donbass. This support primarily revealed their true patriotism – a feeling that is historically inherent in our nation. It is stunning in its dignity and deep understnding by everyone – I will stress, everyone – of the inseparable link between one’s own destiny and the destiny of the Fatherland.
My dear friends, I would like to thank everyone, all the people of Russia for their courage and resolve. I would like to thank our heroes, soldiers and officers in the Army and the Navy, the Russian Guards, the secret services staff, and all structures of authority, the fighters in Donetsk and Lugansk corps, volunteers and patriots who are now fighting in the ranks of the BARS combat army reserve.
I would like to apologise that I will not be able to mention everyone during today’s speech. You know, when I was drafting this speech, I wrote a very long list of these heroic units but then removed it from my text because, as I said, it is impossible to mention everyone, and I was afraid to offend anyone I might leave out.
My deepest gratitude to the parents, wives and families of our defenders, the doctors and paramedics, combat medics and medical nurses that are saving the wounded; to the railway workers and drivers that are supplying the front; to the builders that are erecting fortifications and restoring housing, roads and civilian facilities; to the workers and engineers at defence companies, who are now working almost around-the-clock, in several shifts; and to rural workers who reliably ensure food security for the country.
I am grateful to the teachers who sincerely care for the young generations of Russia, especially those that are working in very difficult, almost front-line conditions; the cultural figures that are visiting the zone of hostilities and hospitals to support the soldiers and officers; volunteers that are helping the front and civilians; journalists, primarily war correspondents, that are risking their lives to tell the truth to the world; pastors of Russia’s traditional religions and military clergy, whose wise words support and inspire people; government officials and business people – all those who fulfill their professional, civil and simply human duty.
My special words go to the residents of the Donetsk and Lugansk people’s republics, and the Zaporozhye and Kherson regions. You, my friends, determined your future at the referendums and made a clear choice despite the neo-Nazis’ threats and violence, amid the close military actions. But there has been nothing stronger than your intent to be with Russia, with your Motherland.
I want to emphasise that this is the reaction of the audience to the residents of the Donetsk and Lugansk people’s republics, and the Zaporozhye and Kherson regions. Once again, our deepest respect for them all.
We have already begun and will expand a major socioeconomic recovery and development programme for these new regions within the Federation. It includes restoring production facilities, jobs, and the ports on the Sea of Azov, which again became Russia’s landlocked sea, and building new, modern road,s like we did in Crimea, which now has a reliable land transport corridor with all of Russia. We will definitely implement all of these plans together.
Russia’s regions are currently providing direct assistance to the cities, districts and villages in the Donetsk and Lugansk people’s republics and the Zaporozhye and Kherson regions. They are doing it sincerely, like true brothers and sisters. We are together again, which means that we have become even stronger, and we will do everything in our power to bring back the long-awaited peace to our land and ensure the safety of our people. Our soldiers, our heroes are fighting for this, for their ancestors, for the future of their children and grandchildren, for uniting our people.
Friends, I would like to ask you to pay your respects to our fellow soldiers who were killed in the attacks of neo-Nazis and raiders, who gave up their lives for Russia, for civilians, the elderly, women and children.
Thank you.
We all understand, and I understand also how unbearably hard it is for their wives, sons and daughters, for their parents who raised those dignified defenders of the Fatherland – like the Young Guard members from Krasnodon, young men and women who fought against Nazism and for Donbass during the Great Patriotic War. Everyone in Russia remembers their courage, resilience, enormous strength of spirit and self-sacrifice to this day.
Our duty is to support the families that have lost their loved ones and to help them raise their children and give them an education and a job. The family of each participant in the special military operation must be a priority and treated with care and respect. Their needs must be responded to immediately, without bureaucratic delays.
I suggest establishing a dedicated state fund for bringing targeted, personalised assistance to the families of fallen fighters, as well as veterans of the special military operation. This entity will be tasked with coordinating efforts to offer social, medical support and counselling, and also address matters related to sending them to health resorts and providing rehabilitation services, while also assisting them in education, sports, employment and in acquiring a new profession. This fund will also have an essential mission to ensure long-term home care and high-technology prosthetics for those who need that.
I am asking the Government to work with the State Council Commission on Social Policy and with the regions to resolve the organisational matters as quickly as possible.
The state fund must be transparent in its work, while streamlining assistance and operating as a one-stop-shop, free from red tape or administrative barriers. Every family without exception, and every veteran will have their personal social worker, a coordinator, who will be there for them in person to resolve in real time any issue they might face. Let me emphasise that the fund must open its offices in all regions of the Russian Federation in 2023.
We already have measures in place for supporting Great Patriotic War veterans, combat veterans, as well as participants in local conflicts. I believe these essential elements will be added to the state fund’s mission moving forward. We need to explore this possibility, and I am asking the Government to do so.
Make no mistake: the fact that we are establishing a state fund does not mean that other institutions or officials at other levels of government will be relieved of their responsibility. I expect all federal agencies, regions and municipalities to stay focused on veterans, on service personnel and their families. In this context, I would like to thank the senior regional officials, mayors, and governors who routinely meet with people, including by visiting the line of contact, and support their fellow countrymen.
On a special note, let me say that today, career service personnel, mobilised conscripts, and volunteers all share frontline hardships, including in terms of provisions, supplies and equipment, remuneration, and insurance payments to the wounded, as well as healthcare services. However, there are complaints that make it all the way to my office, as well as to the governors, as they have been telling me, and to the military prosecutor’s office and the Human Rights Commissioner, showing that some of these issues have yet to be resolved. We need to get to the bottom of each complaint on a case-by-case basis.
And one more thing: everyone understands that serving in the special military operation zone causes immense physical and mental stress, since people risk their lives and health every day. For this reason, I believe that the mobilised conscripts, as well as all service personnel, and all those taking part in the special military operation, including volunteers, must benefit from a leave of absence of at least 14 days every six months without counting the time it takes them to travel to their destination. This way, every fighter will be able to meet family and spend time with their loved ones.
Colleagues, as you are aware, a 2021–2025 plan for building and developing the Armed Forces was approved by a Presidential Executive Order and is being implemented and adjusted as necessary. Importantly, our next steps to reinforce the Army and the Navy and to secure the current and future development of the Armed Forces must be based on actual combat experience gained during the special military operation, which is extremely important, I would even say absolutely invaluable to us.
For example, the latest systems account for over 91 percent, 91.3 percent, of Russia's nuclear deterrence forces. To reiterate, based on our newly acquired experience, we must access a similarly high quality level for all other components of the Armed Forces.
Officers and sergeants who act as competent, modern and decisive commanders, and they are many, will be promoted to higher positions as a matter of priority, sent to military universities and academies, and will serve as a powerful personnel reserve for the Armed Forces. Without a doubt, they are a valuable resource in civilian life and at governments at all levels. I just want our colleagues to pay attention to that. It is very important. The people must know that the Motherland appreciates their contribution to the defence of the Fatherland.
We will widely introduce the latest technology to ensure high-quality standards in the Army and Navy. We have corresponding pilot projects and samples of weapons and equipment in each area. Many of them are significantly superior to their foreign counterparts. Our goal is to start mass production. This work is underway and is picking up pace. Importantly, this relies on domestic research and the industrial base and involves small- and medium-sized high-tech businesses in implementation of the state defence order.
Today, our plants, design bureaus and research teams employ experienced specialists and increasing numbers of talented and highly skilled young people who are oriented towards breakthrough achievements while remaining true to the tradition of Russian gunsmiths, which is to spare no effort to ensure victory.
We will certainly strengthen the guarantees for our workforce, in part concerning salaries and social security. I propose launching a special programme for low-cost rental housing for defence industry employees. The rental payments for them will be significantly lower than the going market rate, since a significant portion of it will be covered by the state.
The Government reviewed this issue. I instruct you to work through the details of this programme and start building such rental housing without delay, primarily, in the cities that are major defence, industrial and research centres.
Colleagues,
As I have already said, the West has opened not only military and informational warfare against us, but is also seeking to fight us on the economic front. However, they have not succeeded on any of these fronts, and never will. Moreover, those who initiated the sanctions are punishing themselves: they sent prices soaring in their own countries, destroyed jobs, forced companies to close, and caused an energy crisis, while telling their people that the Russians were to blame for all of this. We hear that.
What means did they use against us in their efforts to attack us with sanctions? They tried disrupting economic ties with Russian companies and depriving the financial system of its communication channels to shutter our economy, isolate us from export markets and thus undermine our revenues. They also stole our foreign exchange reserves, to call a spade a spade, tried to depreciate the ruble and drive inflation to destructive heights.
Let me reiterate that the sanctions against Russia are merely a means, while the aim as declared by the Western leaders, to quote them, is to make us suffer. “Make them suffer” – what a humane attitude. They want to make our people suffer, which is designed to destabilise our society from within.
However, their gamble failed to pay off. The Russian economy, as well as its governance model proved to be much more resilient than the West thought. The Government, parliament, the Bank of Russia, the regions and of course the business community and their employees all worked together to ensure that the economic situation remained stable, offered people protection and preserved jobs, prevented shortages, including of essential goods, and supported the financial system and business owners who invest in their enterprises, which also means investing in national development.
As early as in March 2022, we launched a dedicated assistance package for businesses and the economy worth about a trillion rubles. I would like to draw your attention to the fact that this has nothing to do with printing money. Not at all. Everything we do is solidly rooted in market principles.
In 2022, there was a decline in the gross domestic product. Mr Mishustin called me to say, “I would like to ask you to mention this.” I think that these data were released yesterday, right on schedule.
You may remember that some predicted that the economy would shrink by 20 to 25 percent, or maybe 10 percent. Only recently, we spoke about a 2.9 percent decline, and I was the one who announced this figure. Later it came down to 2.5 percent. However, in 2022, the GDP declined by 2.1 percent, according to the latest data. And we must be mindful of the fact that back in February and March of last year some predicted that the economy would be in free fall.
Russian businesses have restructured their logistics and have strengthened their ties with responsible, predictable partners – there are many of them, they are the majority in the world.
I would like to note that the share of the Russian ruble in our international settlements has doubled as compared to December 2021, reaching one third of the total, and including the currencies of the friendly countries, it exceeds half of all transactions.
We will continue working with our partners to create a sustainable, safe system of international settlements, which will be independent of the dollar and other Western reserve currencies that are bound to lose their universal appeal with this policy of the Western elite, the Western rulers. They are doing all this to themselves with their own hands. We are not the ones reducing transactions in dollars or other so-called universal currencies – they are doing everything with their own hands.
You know, there is a maxim, cannons versus butter. Of course, national defence is the top priority, but in resolving strategic tasks in this area, we should not repeat the mistakes of the past and should not destroy our own economy. We have everything we need to both ensure our security and create conditions for confident progress in our country. We are acting in line with this logic and we intend to continue doing this.
Thus, many basic, I will stress, civilian industries in the national economy are far from being in decline, they have increased their production last year by a considerable amount. The scale of housing put into service exceeded 100 million square meters for the first time in our modern history.
As for agricultural production, it recorded two-digit growth rates last year. Thank you very much. We are most grateful to our agricultural producers. Russian agrarians harvested a record amount – over 150 million tonnes of grain, including over 100 million tonnes of wheat. By the end of the agricultural season, that is, June 30, 2023, we will bring our grain exports to 55–60 million tonnes.
Just 10 or 15 years ago, this seemed like a fairy tale, an absolutely unfeasible plan. If you remember, and I am sure some people do remember this – the former Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister of Agriculture are here – just recently, agrarians took in 60 million tonnes overall in a year, whereas now 55–60 million is their export potential alone. I am convinced we have every opportunity for a similar breakthrough in other areas as well.
We prevented the labour market from collapsing. On the contrary, we were able to reduce unemployment in the current environment. Today, considering the major challenges coming at us from all sides, the labour market is even better than it used to be. You may remember that the unemployment rate was 4.7 percent before the pandemic, and now, I believe, it is 3.7 percent. What is the figure, Mr Mishustin? 3.7 percent? This is an all-time low.
Let me reiterate that the Russian economy has prevailed over the risks it faced – it has prevailed. Of course, it was impossible to anticipate many of them, and we had to respond literally on the fly, dealing with issues as they emerged. Both the state and businesses had to move quickly. I will note that private actors, SMEs, played an essential role in these efforts, and we must remember this. We avoided having to apply excessive regulation or distorting the economy by giving the state a more prominent role.
What else there is to say? The recession was limited to the second quarter of 2022, while the economy grew in the third and fourth quarters. In fact, the Russian economy has embarked on a new growth cycle. Experts believe that it will rely on a fundamentally new model and structure. New, promising global markets, including the Asia-Pacific, are taking precedence, as is the domestic market, with its research, technology and workforce no longer geared toward exporting commodities but manufacturing goods with high added value. This will help Russia unleash its immense potential in all spheres and sectors.
We expect to see a solid increase in domestic demand as early as this year. I am convinced that companies will use this opportunity to expand their manufacturing, make new products that are in high demand, and to take over the market niches vacated or about to be vacated by Western companies as they withdraw.
Today, we clearly see what is going on and understand the structural issues we have to address in logistics, technology, finance, and human resources. Over the past years, we have been talking a lot and at length about the need to restructure our economy. Now these changes are a vital necessity, a game changer, and all for the better. We know what needs to be done to enable Russia to make steady progress and to develop independently regardless of any outside pressure or threats, while guaranteeing our national security and interests.
I would like to point out and to emphasise that the essence of our task is not to adapt to circumstances. Our strategic task is to take the economy to a new horizon. Everything is changing now, and changing extremely fast. This is not only a time of challenges but also a time of opportunities. This is really so today. And our future depends on the way we realise these opportunities. We must put an end – and I want to emphase this – to all interagency conflicts, red tape, grievances, doublespeak, or any other nonsense. Everything we do must contribute to achieving our goals and delivering results. This is what we must strive to achieve.
Enabling Russian companies and small family-run businesses to successfully tap the market is a victory in itself. Building cutting-edge factories and kilometres of new roads is a victory. Every new school, every new kindergarten we build is a victory. Scientific discoveries and new technologies – these are also victories, of course. What matters is that all of us contribute to our shared success.
What areas should we focus the partnership of the state, the regions and domestic business on?
First, we will expand promising foreign economic ties and build new logistics corridors. A decision has already been made to extend the Moscow-Kazan expressway to Yekaterinburg, Chelyabinsk and Tyumen, and eventually to Irkutsk and Vladivostok with branches to Kazakhstan, Mongolia and China. This will, in part, allows us to considerably expand our ties with Southeast Asian markets.
We will develop Black Sea and Sea of Azov ports. We will pay special attention to the North-South international corridor, as those who work on this every day know. Vessels with a draft of up to 4.5 meters will be able to pass through the Volga-Caspian Sea Canal this year. This will open up new routes for business cooperation with India, Iran, Pakistan, and the Middle Eastern countries. We will continue developing this corridor.
Our plans include expedited modernisation of the eastern railways – the Trans-Siberian Railway and the Baikal-Amur Railway (BAM) – and building up the potential of the Northern Sea Route. This will create not only additional freight traffic but also a foundation for reaching our national goals on developing Siberia, the Arctic and the Far East.
The infrastructure of the regions and the development of infrastructure, including communications, telecommunications and railways will receive a powerful impetus. Next year, 2024, we will bring to a proper condition at least 85 percent of all roads in the country’s largest metropolises, as well as over half of all regional and municipal roads. I am sure we will achieve this.
We will also continue our free gas distribution programme. We have already made the decision to extend it to social facilities – kindergartens and schools, outpatient clinics and hospitals, as well as primary healthcare centres. This programme will now be permanent for our citizens – they can always request a connection to the gas distribution system.
This year, we will launch a large programme to build and repair housing and utility systems. Over the next ten years, we plan to invest at least 4.5 trillion rubles in this. We know how important this is for our people and how neglected this area has been. It is necessary to improve this situation, and we will do it. It is important to give the programme a powerful start. So, I would like to ask the Government to ensure stable funding for this.
Second, we will need to significantly expand our economy’s production capabilities and to increase domestic industrial capacity.
An industrial mortgage tool has been created, and an easy-term loan can now be taken out not only to purchase production facilities, but also to build or upgrade them. The size of such a loan was discussed many times and there were plans to increase it. It is a decent amount for a first step: up to 500 million rubles. It is available at a rate of 3 or 5 percent for up to seven years. It sounds like a very good programme and should be put to good use.
New terms for industrial clusters took effect this year, including a lower fiscal and administrative burden on resident companies, and long-term state orders and subsidies to support demand for their innovative products, which are just entering the market.
According to estimates, these measures will generate high-demand projects worth over 10 trillion rubles by 2030. Investment is expected to reach about 2 trillion this year alone. Please note that these are not forecasts, but existing benchmarks.
Therefore, I would like the Government to expedite the launch of these projects, give a hand to businesses and come up with systemic support measures, including tax incentives. I am aware that the financial bloc does not like to provide incentives, and I partly share this approach: the taxation system must be consistent and without niches or exemptions, but this particular case calls for a creative approach.
So, starting this year, Russian companies will be able to reduce their revenue taxes if they purchase advanced domestic IT solutions and AI-enhanced products. Moreover, these expenses will be credited at one and a half times the actual cost, meaning that every ruble invested in purchasing such products will result in a tax deduction of 1.5 rubles.
I propose extending these deductions to purchases of all kinds of Russian high-tech equipment. I would like the Government to come up with a list of such equipment by specific industry and with the procedure for granting deductions. This is a good solution to reinvigorate the economy.
Third, a crucial issue on our economic development agenda to do with the new sources of funding investment, which we have been talking about a lot.
Thanks to our strong payments balance, Russia does not need to borrow funds abroad, kowtow and beg for money, and then hold long discussions on what, how much and on what conditions we would pay back. Russian banks are working stably and sustainably and have a solid margin for security.
In 2022, the volume of bank loans for the corporate sector increased, I repeat, increased. There was considerable concern about that, but we have reported growth, an increase of 14 percent, or more than we reported in 2021, before the miliary operation. In 2021, the figure was 11.7 percent; last year, it was 14 percent. The mortgage portfolio went up by 20.4 percent. We are growing.
Last year, the banking sector as a whole operated at a profit. It was not as large as in the preceding years, but it was considerable nevertheless: 203 billion rubles. This is another indicator of the stability of the Russian financial sector.
According to our estimates, inflation in Russia will approach the target figure of 4 percent in the second quarter this year. I would like to remind you that the inflation rate has reached 12, 17 and 20 percent in some EU countries. Our figure is 4 or 5 percent; the Central Bank and the Finance Ministry are still discussing the figure, but it will be close to the target. Given these positive dynamics and other macroeconomic parameters, we are creating objective conditions for lowering long-term interest rates in the economy, which means that loans for the real economic sector will become more affordable.
Individual long-term savings are a vital source of investment resources around the world, and we must also stimulate their attraction into the investment sphere. I would like the Government to expedite the submission of draft laws to the State Duma to launch the relevant state programme as soon as this April.
It is important to create additional conditions to encourage people to invest and earn at home, in the country. At the same time, it is necessary to guarantee the safety of people’s investment in voluntary retirement savings. We should create a mechanism here similar to the one used for insuring bank deposits. I would like to remind you that such savings, worth up to 1.4 million rubles, are insured by the state on guarantee deposits. I propose doubling the sum to 2.8 million rubles for voluntary retirement savings. Likewise, we must protect people’s investment in other long-term investment instruments, including against the possible bankruptcy of financial brokers.
Separate decisions must be taken to attract funds to rapidly growing and high-tech businesses. We will approve support for the placement of their shares on the domestic stock market, including tax benefits for both the companies and the buyers of their stock.
Freedom of enterprise is a vital element of economic sovereignty. I will repeat: against the backdrop of external attempts to contain Russia, private businesses have proven their ability to quickly adapt to the changing environment and ensure economic growth in difficult conditions. So, every business initiative aimed at benefiting the country should receive support.
I believe it is necessary to return, in this context, to the revision of a number of norms of criminal law as regards the economic elements of crime. Of course, the state must control what is happening in this area. We should not allow an anything-goes attitude here but we should not go too far, either. It is necessary to move faster towards the decriminalisation I mentioned. I hope the Government will consistently and seriously conduct this work together with Parliament, the law-enforcement bodies and business associations.
At the same time, I would like to ask the Government to suggest, in close cooperation with Parliament, additional measures for speeding up the de-offshorisation of the economy. Businesses, primarily those operating in key sectors and industries should operate in Russian jurisdiction – this is a fundamental principle.
Colleagues, in this context I would like to make a small philosophical digression. This is what I would like to single out.
We remember what problems and imbalances the Soviet economy faced in its later stages. This is why after the collapse of the Soviet Union and its planned system, in the chaos of the 1990s, the country began to create its economy along the lines of market relations and private ownership. Overall, this was the right thing to do. The Western countries were largely an example to follow in this respect. As you know, their advisers were a dime a dozen, and it seemed enough to simply copy their models. True, I remember they still argued with each other – the Europeans argued with the Americans on how the Russian economy should develop.
And what happened as a result? Our national economy was largely oriented to the West and for the most part as a source of raw materials. Naturally, there were different nuances, but overall, we were seen as a source of raw materials. The reasons for this are also clear – naturally, the new Russian businesses that were taking shape were primarily oriented toward generating profit, quick and easy profit in the first place. What could provide this? Of course, the sale of resources – oil, gas, metals and timber.
Few people thought about other alternatives or, probably, they did not have the opportunity to invest long-term. This is the reason other, more complex industries did not make much headway. It took us years – other governments saw this clearly – to break this negative trend. We had to adjust our tax system and make large-scale public investments.
We have achieved real and visible change. Indeed, the results are there, but, again, we should keep in mind the circumstances in which our major businesses developed. Technologies were coming from the West, cheaper sources of financing and lucrative markets were in the West, and capital started flowing to the West as well. Unfortunately, instead of expanding production and buying equipment and technology to create new jobs in Russia, they spent their money on foreign mansions, yachts and luxury real estate.
They began to invest in the economy later, but initially the money flowed rapidly to the West for consumption purposes. And since their money was there, that is where their children were educated, where their life was, their future. It was very difficult and almost impossible for the state to track and prevent these developments, because we lived in a free market paradigm.
Recent events have clearly shown that the image of the West as a safe haven for capital was a mirage. Those who failed to understand this in time, who saw Russia only as a source of income and planned to live mostly abroad, have lost a lot. They just got robbed there and saw even their legitimate money taken away.
At some point I made a joke – many may still remember it – I told Russian businesspeople that they will make themselves sick running from courtroom to courtroom and from office to office in the West trying to save their money. That is exactly how it turned out.
You know, I will say something that is quite simple, but truly important. Trust me, not a single ordinary citizen in our country felt sorry for those who lost their assets in foreign banks, lost their yachts or palaces abroad, and so on. In their conversations around the kitchen table, people have all recalled the privatisation of the 1990s, when enterprises that had been built by our entire nation were sold for next to nothing and the so-called new elites flaunted their lavish lifestyle.
There are other key aspects. During the years that followed the breakup of the Soviet Union, the West never stopped trying to set the post-Soviet states on fire and, most importantly, finish off Russia as the largest surviving portion of the historical reaches of our state. They encouraged international terrorists to assault us, provoked regional conflicts along the perimeter of our borders, ignored our interests and tried to contain and suppress our economy.
I am saying this because big business in Russia controls strategic enterprises with thousands of workers that determine the socioeconomic well-being of many regions and, hence, the overall state of affairs. So, whenever leaders or owners of such businesses become dependent on governments that adopt policies that are unfriendly to Russia, this poses a great threat to us, a danger to our country. This is an untenable situation.
Yes, everyone has a choice. Some may choose to live in a seized mansion with a blocked account, trying to find a place for themselves in a seemingly attractive Western capital, a resort or some other comfortable place abroad. Anyone has the right to do that, and we will never infringe on it. But it is time to see that in the West these people have always been and will always remain second class strangers who can be treated any way, and their money, connections and the acquired titles of counts, peers or mayors will not help at all. They must understand that they are second class people there.
There is another option: to stay with your Motherland, to work for your compatriots, not only to open new businesses but also to change life around you in cities, towns and throughout your country. We have quite a few businesspeople like this, real fighters in our business community, and we associate the future of our business with them. Everyone must know that the sources of their prosperity and their future can only be here, in their native country Russia.
If they do, we will create a very strong and self-sufficient economy that will not remain aloof in the world but will make use of all its competitive advantages. Russian capital, the money earned here, must be put to work for the country, for our national development. Today, we see huge potential in the development of infrastructure, the manufacturing sector, in domestic tourism and many other industries.
I would like those who have come up against the predatory mores of the West to hear what I have to say: running around with cap in hand, begging for your own money makes no sense, and most importantly, it accomplishes nothing, especially now that you realise who you are dealing with. Stop clinging to the past, resorting to the courts to get at least something back. Change your lives and your jobs, because you are strong people – I am addressing our businesspeople now, many of whom I have known for years, who know what is what in life.
Launch new projects, earn money, work hard for Russia, invest in enterprises and jobs, and help schools and universities, science and healthcare, culture and sports. In this way, you will increase your wealth and will also win the respect and gratitude of the people for a generation ahead. The state and society will certainly support you.
Let us consider this as a message for our business: get moving in the right direction.
Colleagues,
Russia is an open country and at the same time, a distinct civilisation. There is no claim to exclusivity or superiority in this statement, but this civilisation of ours – that’s what matters. Our ancestors passed it to us and we must preserve it for our descendants and pass it on to them.
We will develop cooperation with friends, with all those who are ready to work with us. We will adopt the best practices but will primarily rely on our own potential, on the creative energy of Russian society, on our traditions and values.
Here I would like to mention the character of our people who have always been distinguished by their generosity, magnanimity, mercy and compassion, and Russia, as a country, fully reflects these traits. We know how to be good friends, how to stand by one’s word. We will never let anyone down and will always support those in a difficult situation without hesitation.
Everyone remembers that during the pandemic we were actually the first to support some European countries, including Italy and other states when they were going through the most difficult weeks of the COVID outbreak, and let’s not forget how we are helping Syria and Turkiye after a devastating earthquake.
It is the people of Russia that are the foundation of our national sovereignty and our source of power. The rights and freedoms of our citizens are immutable – they are guaranteed by the Constitution and we will not depart from this despite the external challenges and threats.
I would like to emphasise in this context that elections to local and regional government bodies next September and the presidential elections in 2024 will take place in strict accordance with the law and observance of all democratic, constitutional provisions.
Elections always reveal different approaches to resolving social and economic goals. That said, the leading political forces are consolidated and united in the main idea – the security and wellbeing of the people; our sovereignty and our national interests override everything else for us.
I would like to thank you for this responsible, firm position and recall the words of Pyotr Stolypin, a patriot and a proponent of a strong Russian state. He said this in the State Duma over a hundred years ago, but it is still consonant with our times. He said: “In the cause of defending Russia, all of us must unite and coordinate our efforts, our commitements and our rights for supporting one historical supreme right – the right of Russia to be strong.”
Volunteers at the frontline include deputies of the State Duma and regional parliaments, representatives from different levels of executive government bodies, municipalities, cities, districts and rural areas. All parliamentary parties and leading public associations are taking part in collecting humanitarian aid to help at the front.
Thank you once again – thank you for such a patriotic stand.
Local governments as a public authority closest to the people play a huge role in strengthening civil society and solving everyday problems. People’s trust in the state as a whole, social welfare of the country’s citizens and their confidence in the successful development of the country depends on how they work.
I would like to ask the Presidential Executive Office and the Government to submit proposals on creating tools of direct support for the best managerial teams and practices in large, medium-sized and small municipalities.
The free development of society means being ready to take responsibility for yourself and your loved ones, for your country. These qualities must be encouraged from a young age in the family. Of course, the system of education and our national culture are extremely important for strengthening our common values and our national identity.
The state will use the resources of the Presidential Grants Foundation, the Foundation for Cultural Initiatives, the Institute for Internet Development and other instruments to support all forms of creative endeavour, such as contemporary and traditional art, realism and avant-garde, classical and innovative works. It is not genres or trends that matter. Culture must serve the good, beauty and harmony, ponder some very complicated and contradictory issues in life, but its main mission is not to tear down society but to nurture the best human qualities.
Cultural development will be a priority of rebuilding peaceful life in Donbass and Novorossiya. We will have to rebuild, repair and provide equipment to hundreds of cultural facilities there, including museum collections and buildings, which help people feel the connection between the past and the present and create a link to the future, to feel their affiliation with the common cultural, historical and educational space of the centuries-old great Russia.
We must work together with our teachers, academics and professionals to seriously improve the quality of school and university textbooks, first of all in the humanities – history, social science, literature and geography – so that our young people learn as much as possible about Russia, its great past, its culture and traditions.
We have brilliant, talented young people who are willing to work for the benefit of our country in areas like scientific research, culture, the social sphere, business and public administration. The Leaders of Russia competition, as well as the Leaders of Revival competition currently taking place in the new constituent entities of the Federation, are opening up new horizons for career growth for these very people.
Notably, a number of winners and finalists in these competitions have voluntarily joined military units. Many of them are now working in the liberated territories helping rebuild economic and social life, and they are acting professionally, decisively and courageously.
Generally speaking, nothing can replace the school of war. People return entirely different, and they are ready to lay down their lives for the Fatherland, wherever they may be working.
Let me stress that it’s precisely those who were born and raised in Donbass and Novorossiya, who have fought for them, they will be and should form the foundation of our joint effort to develop these regions. I want them to hear me: Russia is counting on you.
With the ambitious tasks facing our country in mind, we must seriously revise our approaches to the system of professional education, to our science and technology policy.
At the recent meeting of the Council for Science and Education, we discussed the need to prioritise our efforts, to concentrate resources on obtaining specific and fundamentally meaningful scientific results, primarily in areas where we have done a fair amount of work and which are of critical importance to our country, including transport, energy, housing and utilities, public healthcare, agriculture, and the manufacturing industry.
Innovative technology invariably relies on existing fundamental research. Here, just like in culture – and I want to emphasise this – we must give researchers greater freedom for creativity. We should not have everyone just focused on the results that we will need tomorrow. Fundamental science makes its own rules.
Also, setting and fulfilling ambitious goals is a powerful incentive for young people to choose science as their field and a chance to prove their leadership skills and being the best in the world. Our research teams have much to be proud of.
Last December, I met with some of our young researchers. One of their questions concerned housing. A mundane, but important issue. Housing certificates for young researchers are already available. Last year, an additional one billion rubles was set aside for these purposes. I hereby instruct the Government to identify reserves to expand this programme.
In recent years, the prestige of secondary vocational education has grown significantly. The demand for graduates of technical schools and colleges is just huge, colossal. You see, if our unemployment has fallen to a historic low of 3.7 percent, it means that people are working, new personnel is needed.
I believe that we should significantly expand the Professionalitet project, under which educational and industrial clusters are created, the educational base is updated, and enterprises and employers develop educational programmes based on the needs of the economy in close contact with colleges and technical schools. And of course, it is very important for mentors with experience in real, complex production to join in.
The task is clear: in the next five years we need to train about a million specialists of working professions for the electronics industry, the robotics industry, mechanical engineering, metallurgy, pharmaceuticals, agriculture and the defence industry, construction, transport, nuclear and other industries that are key to ensuring the security, sovereignty and competitiveness of Russia.
Finally, a very important question is about our higher education. Significant changes are also overdue here, considering the new requirements for specialists in the economy, social sectors, and in all spheres of life in our country. What we need here is a synthesis of all the best that was in the Soviet system of education and the experience of recent decades.
In this regard, the following is proposed.
First, to return to the basic training of specialists with higher education, which is traditional for our country. The term of study can be four to six years. At the same time, programmes can be offered that differ in terms of training, depending on the specific profession, industry and labour market demand even within the same specialty and one university.
Second, if a profession requires additional training or niche specialisation, in this case a young person will be able to continue education by doing a master’s degree or choosing residency training.
Third, postgraduate studies will be made into a separate level of professional education, the task of which is to train personnel for scientific and teaching professions.
I want to emphasise that the transition to the new system should be smooth. The Government, together with parliamentarians, will need to make numerous amendments to legislation on education, on the labour market, and so on. Here you need to think everything through, work out every detail. Young people, our citizens should have new opportunities for quality education, employment and professional growth. I repeat: opportunities, not problems.
And I would like to specifically note that those students who are studying now will be able to continue their education under existing programmes. And also, the level of training and higher education diplomas of citizens who have already completed studies under current undergraduate, specialist or master’s programmes are not subject to revision. They must not lose their rights. I ask the Russian Popular Front to take all issues related to changes in the field of higher education under special control.
This year was declared the Year of the Teacher and Mentor in Russia. Teachers are directly involved in building the country’s future, and it is important to raise the social status of their work. Parents should talk to their children more about gratitude for their teachers, and teachers should instil in children respect and love for their parents. Let’s always remember this.
I will talk about support for children and Russian families in a minute.
I would like to note that the so-called children’s budget, or budget allocations to support families in Russia, has increased manifold rather than by a small percent over the past few years. These expenses are the fastest growing part of the country’s main financial document – the budget, the law on the budget. I would like to thank the parliament members and the Government for their uniform, consolidated understanding of our national priorities.
On February 1, the maternity capital in Russia was again adjusted for inflation. As we promised, it was adjusted by last year’s inflation rate, that is, by 11.9 percent. Russian citizens – residents of the new regions of the Federation – are also entitled to this support now. I suggest granting maternity capital to families in the Donetsk and Lugansk people’s republics and the Zaporozhye and Kherson regions where children were born starting from 2007, that is, when this programme was launched throughout Russia. I will recall that at one time we made a similar decision for the residents of Crimea and Sevastopol.
We will continue implementing large-scale programmes aimed at improving the living standards of Russian families.
I would like to emphasise that the Government and the regions of the Federation have been given a practical goal – to ensure noticeable, tangible growth in real wages in Russia.
As we all know, an important indicator, a starting point here is the minimum wage. We raised it twice last year, almost by 20 percent overall.
We will continue raising the minimum wage, doing it at a rate that is higher than the inflation rate and the real wage growth rate. Since the start of this year, the minimum wage was adjusted by 6.3 percent.
I suggest supplementing the planned increase by an additional 10 percent starting January 1, 2024. Thus, the minimum wage will have grown by 18.5 percent to constitute 19,242 rubles.
Now I would like to mention adjustments to the taxation system for the benefit of Russian families. Starting last year, families with two or more children have been relieved of paying tax on the sale of housing if they are purchasing a new, bigger flat or house.
It is necessary to make better use of these instruments – they have proven to be in demand. Families should have more money in their family budgets to be able to resolve their most important and urgent problems.
I suggest increasing the amount of social tax deductions: for children’s education costs – from current 50,000 rubles to 110,000 rubles per year, and for costs on personal education, medical treatment or purchase of medications – from current 120,000 to 150,000 rubles. The state will reimburse the 13 percent income tax paid on these increased amounts.
Naturally we need not only to increase this deduction, but also to make this benefit easily available to people. This deduction should be granted proactively, quickly and online. This process should be easy for applicants.
Next. The well-being, the quality of life of Russian families, and therefore the demographic situation, depend directly on the state of things in the social sphere.
I know that many regions of the Federation are ready to significantly speed up renovation of social infrastructure, cultural and sports facilities, relocation of people from dilapidated housing, and comprehensive development of rural areas. This attitude will certainly be supported.
We will use the following mechanism here: the regions will be able to receive now and use the funds that have been set aside in the 2024 federal budget for national projects, through interest-free treasury loans – they will be automatically repaid in April of 2024. It is a good tool.
We will keep this issue under constant review, and I ask the State Council Commission On Economy and Finance to become involved in this work.
However, we don't need to rush and chase after numbers, especially to the detriment of the quality of the facilities being built. Additional financial resources must be used efficiently to give a high return.
This is particularly vital for the modernisation of primary health care, a large-scale programme that we launched in 2021. I ask the Government and regional leaders not to forget that the benchmark – I have said this many times – is not the numbers in reports, but concrete, visible, tangible progress in the availability and quality of medical care.
I also instruct the Government to adjust the regulatory framework for organising the procurement of ambulances with diagnostic equipment. They allow for medical check-ups and preventive examinations to be carried out directly at enterprises, schools, offices and in remote communities.
We have launched a large-scale school renovation programme. By the end of this year, a total of almost 3,500 school buildings will have been renovated. I would like to point out that most of them are in rural areas and we have done this on purpose. This year such work is also being carried out in the Donetsk and Lugansk people's republics, in the Kherson and Zaporozhye regions. It is meaningful and visible, people really see what is happening. This is very good.
From 2025 onwards, federal funds will be regularly and systematically allocated to the regions for repairing and renovating kindergartens, schools, vocational schools and colleges so as to avoid situations where buildings are in dilapidated condition.
Next, we have set a major goal, to build more than 1,300 new schools between 2019 and 2024. Of these, 850 are now open. Another 400 will open this year. I want the regions to stay on track to meet these objectives. The amount of federal funding for this 2019–2024 programme is almost 490 billion rubles. We will not cut these costs, we will keep this amount intact.
This year, we increased the amount of infrastructure budget loans. We are sending additional funds, not as previously planned, but an additional 250 billion rubles for expanding transport, utility and other infrastructure in the regions.
I hereby instruct the Government to allocate, in addition to these funds, an additional 50 billion rubles – which will be purposefully used to upgrade public transport in the constituent entities of the Federation this year. This upgrade will be used for the latest technology. Please pay special attention to small towns and rural areas.
We have decided to extend the Clean Air project through 2030. The goal is to improve the environment in major industrial centres. I want industrial companies and regional and local authorities to keep in mind that a significant reduction in harmful emissions remains on the agenda.
In addition, we have accomplished much in reforming the waste management industry. We are building up recycling and sorting capacity which will help us build a closed-loop economy. Further elimination of old landfills and hazardous material sites is our top priority. I want the Government, in conjunction with the regions, to draft a list of harmful sites that will be eliminated upon the completion of this programme.
We will continue to restore unique water bodies, including Lake Baikal and the Volga River. In the medium term, we will extend this work to other rivers such as the Don, Kama, Irtysh, Ural, Terek, Volkhov and Neva rivers, and Lake Ilmen. We must not forget about medium and small rivers. I want all levels of government to pay attention to this.
As part of an earlier instruction, a draft law on promoting tourism in specially protected nature areas has been submitted. It was recently discussed at a meeting with the Government. It should clearly define what can be built and where and what cannot, and generally set forth the principles of the ecotourism industry. This is a critically important issue for our country. I ask the State Duma to speed up consideration of this draft law.
Now I will say a few words about what is happening around us.
Colleagues, I will talk about one more issue.
In early February, the North Atlantic alliance made a statement with actual demand to Russia, as they put it, to return to the implementation of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, including admission of inspections to our nuclear defence facilities. I don’t even know what to call this. It is a kind of a theatre of the absurd.
We know that the West is directly involved in the Kiev regime’s attempts to strike at our strategic aviation bases. The drones used for this purpose were equipped and updated with the assistance of NATO specialists. And now they also want to inspect our defence facilities? In the current conditions of confrontation, it simply sounds insane.
I would like to draw your attention specifically to the fact that they are not letting us conduct full-scale inspections under this treaty. Our repeated applications to inspect different facilities remain unanswered or are rejected under formal pretexts, and we cannot verify anything on the other side.
I would like to stress that the United States and NATO are openly saying that their goal is to inflict a strategic defeat on Russia. And what, after such statements they are supposed to tour our defence facilities, including the latest ones, as if nothing happened? A week ago, I signed an executive order putting new land-based strategic systems on combat duty. Are they going to poke their nose there as well? Do they think we will let them go there just because?
Having made this collective statement, NATO actually claimed to be a participant in the Treaty on Strategic Offensive Arms. We agree with this, please go ahead. Moreover, we believe this framing of the issue is long overdue. Let me recall that the US is not the only nuclear power in NATO. Britain and France also have nuclear arsenals. They are developing and upgrading them and these arsenals are also directed against us – they are also directed against Russia. The latest statements by their leaders merely confirm it – listen for yourselves.
We cannot just ignore this and have no right to do so especially now. Nor can we forget that the Soviet Union and the United States initially signed the first Treaty on Strategic Offensive Arms in 1991 in a completely different situation – in conditions of abating tensions and growing mutual trust. Subsequently, our relations reached a level that allowed Russia and the US to say they no longer considered each other enemies. Wonderful, everything was going very well.
The Treaty of 2010 that is in force contains critically important provisions about indivisible security and the direct link between strategic offensive and defensive arms. All of that has long been forgotten. The United States withdrew from the ABM Treaty. It is now a thing of the past. Importantly, our relations have degraded which can be credited entirely to the United States.
After the Soviet Union broke up, they began to revise the outcomes of World War II and to build an American-style world ruled by one master. To do this, they began to rudely destroy the foundations of the international order laid down after WWII in order to cross out the legacy of the Yalta and Potsdam conferences. Step by step, they proceeded to revise the existing international order, to dismantle security and arms control systems, and plotted and carried out a series of wars around the world.
To reiterate, all of that was done for the sole purpose of dismantling the post-WWII architecture of international relations. This is not a figure of speech. This is how it all unfolded in reality. After the Soviet Union collapsed, they sought to perpetuate their global dominance regardless of the interests of modern Russia or other countries for that matter.
Sure enough, the international situation changed after 1945. New centres of growth and influence have been formed and are rapidly expanding. This is a natural and objective process that cannot be ignored. But the United States trying to refashion the international order to suit exclusively its own needs and selfish interests is unacceptable.
Now, they are using NATO to give us signals, which, in fact, is an ultimatum whereby Russia should, no questions asked, implement everything that it agreed to, including the New START Treaty, whereas they will do as they please. As if there is no connection between strategic offensive weapons and, say, the conflict in Ukraine or other hostile Western actions against our country. As if there are no vociferous claims about them seeking to inflict a strategic defeat on us. This is either the height of hypocrisy and cynicism, or the height of stupidity, but they are not idiots. They are not stupid after all. They want to inflict a strategic defeat on us and also to get to our nuclear sites.
In this regard, I am compelled to announce today that Russia is suspending its membership in the New START Treaty. To reiterate, we are not withdrawing from the Treaty, but rather suspending our participation. Before we come back to discussing this issue, we must have a clear idea of what NATO countries such as France or Great Britain have at stake, and how we will account for their strategic arsenals, that is, the Alliance's combined offensive capabilities.
Their statement comes, in fact, as a request to join this process. Well, come onboard, we do not mind. Just try not to lie to everyone this time and present yourselves as champions of peace and detente. We know the truth. We are aware of the fact that certain types of US nuclear weapons are reaching the end of their service life. In this regard, we know for certain that some politicians in Washington are already pondering live nuclear tests, especially since the United States is developing innovative nuclear weapons. There is information to that effect.
Given these circumstances, the Defence Ministry and Rosatom must make everything ready for Russia to conduct nuclear tests. We will not be the first to proceed with these tests, but if the United States goes ahead with them, we will as well. No one should harbour dangerous illusions that global strategic parity can be disrupted.
Colleagues, citizens of Russia,
Today, we are together living through challenging times and overcoming all difficulties together as well. It could not have been otherwise because we have been raised on the example of our great ancestors and must be worthy of their behests that are passed down from generation to generation. We are moving only forward owing to our devotion to our Motherland, our will and our unity.
This cohesion was on display from the first days of the special military operation – hundreds of volunteers, representatives of all ethnicities of our country came to recruitment offices. They decided to stand by the defenders of Donbass, to fight for their native land, for their Fatherland, for the truth and justice. Today, warriors from all regions of our multi-ethnic Motherland are fighting shoulder to shoulder on the frontlines. They pray in different languages, but they all pray for victory, for their fellow soldiers and for the Motherland. (Applause.)
Their difficult military labour, their exploits are finding a powerful response all over Russia. People are supporting our fighters. They don’t want to stay on the sidelines. The front is now passing through the hearts of our people in their millions. They are sending medicine, communication devices, transport, warm clothes and camouflage nets, to name a few – everything that helps protect the lives of our fighters.
I know the comfort letters from children and schoolkids give to our soldiers at the front. They take them into battle as a cherished possession because the sincerity and purity of children’s wishes bring tears to their eyes. They feel more forcefully for whose sake they are fighting and whom they are defending.
Warriors, their families and civilians greatly appreciate the care with which volunteers are surrounding them. They have been acting boldly and decisively from the very start of the special military operation. Under fire and shelling they are leading children, elders and all those in trouble out of basements; they were and still are bringing food, water and clothes to hot spots; they are setting up humanitarian aid centres for refugees and helping doctors in field hospitals and on the combat contact line; they continue to risk their lives to save others.
The Russian Popular Front alone raised over five billion rubles as part of the All for Victory initiative. The flow of donations does not stop. Every contribution is important and this applies to those made by large companies and businesspeople. But especially touching and inspiring are the donations of people with modest incomes, which are contributing part of their savings, salaries and pensions. This coming together to help our warriors, civilians in the zone of hostilities and refugees is worth a lot.
Thank you for this sincere support, cohesion and mutual aid. It is impossible to overstate their importance.
Russia will meet any challenges because we are all one country, a big and united nation. We are confident in ourselves and confident in our strength. The truth is on our side.


First of all, I would like to welcome our guest, the President of the [People’s Democratic] Republic of Algeria and thank him for taking the time to attend today's event. Mr President, thank you very much.

Mr President – and I would like to address our other foreign guests as well: naturally, my remarks will primarily have to do with Russia's development and our plans in a variety of areas, but I believe it will also be of some interest to you, because many of you are either already working in our country or are planning to do so. And I hope that our assessments of the current situation here matter to you and you are interested in what we are going to do in the near future, to decide if you want to engage with us more.

I hope that Mr President will be interested. I apologise if part of what I am going to say will be addressed exclusively to the Russian audience. Even so, I believe other countries might be interested in replicating what we are doing in our economy at the moment. And this will only strengthen the potential for our cooperation.

So, again, I would like to welcome all the participants and guests of the 26th International Economic Forum in St Petersburg.

Last year, speaking from this podium, I described the way I see the challenges Russia, and almost all other countries around the world, were facing. I also talked at length about what we were doing to ensure sustainable, long-term, sovereign development for our country.

Let me remind you that our economy and Russian businesses faced the biggest challenges during the second quarter of 2022 when their operating environment was rapidly changing along with the ways they used to trade, transact and arrange their logistics. They essentially had to shift to a new way of doing business and adopt a new operating mode.

Colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, friends, today, we can say in all confidence that the strategy chosen at the time by both the state and Russian businesses proved its worth. Positive macroeconomic trends are gaining momentum and becoming increasingly apparent.

In April 2023, GDP increased 3.3 percent, annualised, and is expected to add over one percent by the end of the year. This is at least what the IMF believes with its forecast of 0.7 percent. I agree with our analysts who argued that the Russian economy would achieve an even higher growth rate of about 1.5 percent, or maybe even 2 percent. This will enable our country to retain its place among the world’s leading economies.

Both manufacturing and retail trade increased in April with output in the processing sectors growing 2.9 percent year-on-year in January-April. Let me remind you that it was manufacturing that suffered the toughest blow due to disruptions in cooperation and value chains.

So, what allowed us to achieve the positive results I have just mentioned? After all, there was a lot of anxiety among business leaders a year ago. In fact, few people could anticipate how events would unfold. In this context, it was essential that we give businesses something they could rely on, build confidence in government policy, emphasise our unwavering commitment to fundamental market mechanisms, the freedom of entrepreneurship and guarantee that private property was protected.

It is for this reason that during last year’s remarks at the forum I set forth the values governing economic development in the new reality and in the long run. I can now say that everything I said last year, and we must understand that what I said was based on our collective efforts, including the Government, the Presidential Executive Office and the Government’s economic bloc, and everything we prepared and then carried out by working together on the ground, it all worked.

But why? What was it all about?

First, we kept responsible and balanced fiscal and monetary policies in place. This effective combination made it possible for us to maintain minimal unemployment and inflation, which is lower in Russia than in many Western countries, both in the eurozone and other regions. It is close to the historical low – 2.9 percent. Unemployment stands at 3.3 percent which is the lowest in our history.

Importantly, a stable macroeconomic situation has become our competitive advantage and an effective factor behind growth. I must say that in the internal political discussions in previous years, we heard lots of criticism towards the Government and the country's leadership. People wondered why we were so focused on macroeconomic indicators at a time when we needed to act more boldly. Now we know that our efforts to achieve macroeconomic stability were not in vain.

Using budgetary mechanisms and monetary tools, we supported the demand in the economy, which means that we kept enterprises and companies busy and kept a lid on prices.

We will continue to build our macroeconomic policy based on the actual situation and target inflation, just like we did last year or during the pandemic, when demand fell and, in order to support it, we then increased the budget deficit to 3.8 percent of GDP. As soon as the next year, 2021, the budget was executed with a surplus, albeit a small one, 0.4 percent of GDP, but still a surplus.

Our public finances are balanced overall. There is a small federal budget deficit currently, but this is largely due to moving planned spending up to earlier dates or, as we say, to the left of the chart. This was a well-informed decision designed to step up the pace of implementing state and regional programmes.

Certainly, we needed additional funds to reinforce our defence and security capabilities, and to purchase armaments: we must do this to protect our country’s sovereignty. I can say that, on the whole, this appears to be paying off, including from the economic point of view.

The dynamics of non-oil and gas revenue is quite notable. In January-May, it grew by 9.1 percent, which is markedly higher than the projected number. In May, it was up by an extra 28.5 percent.

Let me emphasise once again that I am talking about budget revenue which is not related to oil and gas exports. The fact that our real economy, the processing industries and sectors, as well as trade and services are all developing and gaining momentum is a very important indicator. Russians in this audience probably remember and know that we have been talking about ending our dependence on oil and gas exports for quite some time now. This trend is gradually picking up steam, although I have to say that when it comes to oil and gas there are important things we must take into consideration.

Second, the state has the financial capability to uphold its steadfast commitment to ensuring social justice, reducing poverty and inequality. This focus has been an important factor enabling us to overcome the challenges we had to face last year.

We provide targeted support to the neediest. If you look at this category and their incomes, this indicator increased by about 30 percent over the past year. In 2022, 1.7 million were lifted out of poverty, while the poverty level declined to single digits at 9.8 percent.

Of course, every percentage point matters, which is rather obvious. But even the positive trends I mentioned may not be all that important especially for those who just barely made it above the poverty threshold. Their income is still too low, but I will return to this issue later. What matters here is the trend, and we must definitely support and maintain it, and this is what we will do.

We have been adjusting pensions, social benefits and allowances above the inflation rate, while also setting a higher minimum wage and subsistence rate. As a result, real disposable incomes started growing once again in the fourth quarter of 2022. What a relief. There has only been a slight improvement so far, but this is still a positive trend, and we expect it to grow stronger in 2023. In any case, I hope that this happens.

These developments clearly support demand, and thus domestic manufacturing and services, especially companies in the regions, on the ground. This, in turn, has a positive effect on regional finances and budgets.

Prioritising private initiative was the third principle I mentioned a year ago. Last year, there were predictions that sanctions would pressure Russia to revert to a closed, command economy. However, as you know, we opted to give businesses more freedom and the way we applied this principle demonstrated that this was the right decision, as experience has borne out.

Replacing transnational corporations that have left the Russian market was a notable event and a powerful boost for our businesses. Unfortunately, these corporations were unable to resist the sweeping political pressure exerted by international political elites.

You are well aware of the fact that we did not expel anyone from our market or our economy. On the contrary, we suggested that they weigh all the pros and cons and think carefully about their Russian partners and the potential consequences. Each of our partners had a choice.

Importantly, products that are made at our production facilities have long been sold under foreign brands. In fact, these are Russian goods with foreign labels.

So, the departure of trademark owners does not mean that the production will stop. Labels will change, that is all. Revenue from this business will stay in our country. We will work for the new Russian owners, and help them keep their employees, contractors and subcontractors paid in full.

In a word, if at first our entrepreneurs, I would say, were very worried about the departure of Western companies, they are now taking over vacant production facilities and shopping centre spaces. Some small, so-called niche brands that used to sell clothes, footwear or other goods via social media are now opening their own stores.

I mentioned the following at an event in Moscow: in this sector of the economy, the majority of foreign operators left and freed up to 2 million square metres of retail space and a niche of about 2 trillion rubles. Excellent. Almost all of that has been taken over by our entrepreneurs.

Last year alone, Russian manufacturers filed more than 90,000 trademark applications. In addition to clothing and footwear, they cover mostly software, household chemicals, perfumery products, cosmetics and so on.

I do not think I will reveal a secret if I say that our business leaders are increasingly in favour of not letting the itinerant foreign companies back. The same thing happened in agriculture after 2014, when our agricultural enterprises began to pick up steam and the meetings with agricultural businesses were dominated by one question only: will we let our competitors back or not? When asked at what point we should let them back the answer was never. Do not let them come back at all, we will do everything ourselves Admittedly, our agricultural producers have lived up to their promise. Agricultural output grew by over 10 percent last year. We cover our needs for all items in this sector and are exporting much of our output.

That said, if foreign manufacturers ever wish to return to our market – we keep hearing this more and more – we are not shutting our doors to anyone. Without a doubt, no one is afraid of competition. As is known, it is the engine behind progress and trade. We will create the necessary conditions for them to work in Russia.

However, we will certainly keep in mind the specifics of how some of our partners behaved and, of course, we will always prioritise the interests of our businesses. By the way, we consider the foreign companies that have stayed and are planning to work here domestic producers and will treat them just like we treat our own companies.

The Agency for Strategic Initiatives launched a special annual competition for all these companies to identify Russia’s best emerging brands. The competition is expected to announce its first results soon, sometime in late June. It covers some ten categories and has already received over 5,000 submissions from across the country.

I am certain that the opportunity to take part in and win this competition will serve as a positive challenge for our businesses and will help them strengthen their market standing and invest more in building their capacity and adding jobs. This is why I am calling on the heads of the regions to be there for their emerging brands. This is what I am asking you. They need support at the regional level like never before.

I will note that in 2022, Russian companies increased their fixed capital investment in real terms. This trend continued into 2023, into the first quarter. This happened despite the high base effect from last year when investment growth was in the double digits.

Russian banks helped sustain robust investment growth despite facing a challenging environment in terms of their capital base. To give you an idea, corporate lending increased 14.3 percent in 2022, while consumer lending was up 9.5 percent.

In April 2023, corporate lending growth reached 17.1 percent, while consumer lending growth amounted to 12.9 percent. These are all very good results. Mortgages have been growing at an above-average pace too, at 18 percent.

The key factors fuelling investment growth have been the fact that we removed digital barriers and prioritised the development of transport, logistics and other kinds of infrastructure. This is in fact our fourth principle. We outlined it and made sure it materialised in 2022.

System-wide and consistent policies along these lines have been yielding results. Construction volumes have been growing for five consecutive years, and 2022 was no exception. On the contrary, this trend is gaining momentum and carries on. In 2022, construction was up 5.2 percent, while the same indicator for January-April 2023 reached 7.4 percent.

We will continue our infrastructure construction and upgrades, including roadways and railways, overpasses and bridges. We will also carry on with our effort to remove bottlenecks, since there are quite a few of them out there. Expanding the capacities of our seaports and border checkpoints will also be at the top of our agenda.

We are going to pay special attention to the North-South Transport Corridor, with plans to double export freight volumes by 2025 and to triple them by 2030. In May, as many of you know, we concluded an agreement with our Iranian partners on building a rail section in Iran that is currently lacking. We are also dredging the Volga-Caspian Canal that will be deep enough this year to take vessels with a draught of 4.5 metres.

As for the Eastern direction, by 2025 its export freight volumes will grow by a third and another 100 million to the 2022 figures will be added by 2030.

Here, the key is to increase the transport capacity of the Baikal System, the Baikal-Amur Mainline, and the Trans-Siberian Railway. Already this year it will add 15 million tonnes to reach 173 million tonnes.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend the success of the Government and Russian Railways, which were able to quicky scale up container outflows from the Far East, eliminating bottlenecks and reducing the load on the Far Eastern terminals while facilitating imports of goods and components from Asia.

I can say that we are going to upgrade our merchant fleet significantly in the coming five years. The Ministry of Industry and Trade has already made adjustments to the large-scale shipbuilding programme. We will draw on our National Welfare Fund to finance it. Of note, as part of this programme alone, at least 260 vessels are slated for construction at Russia’s shipyards between 2023 and 2027.

We will also continue to build our ice-breaking fleet, needed for the Northern Sea Route, which is seeing fast expansion. Last year, it was used to carry 34 million tonnes of freight. We expect that in 2024, these volumes will multiply, which will require a rapid upgrading of rail and other kinds of infrastructure in the Murmansk Transport Hub and other Arctic ports.

In this regard, I can point to the work we are doing to comprehensively develop regional infrastructure and to enhance transport connectivity of our territories.

Last year, we repaired over 20,000 km of regional roads, and built and upgraded 1,200 km. All of that, colleagues, friends, represents record volumes and figures, and I would like to thank our builders, engineers, designers and workers for their important and efficient work. I expect this bar to be not only cleared next year but to be raised even higher. We have everything we need to make that happen; all the funding is there. So, I hope everything will go according to plan.

State-of-the-art communications and telecommunications lines are expanding. Over 3,000 kilometres of them were built last year. The plan for this year includes building over 9,000 kilometres of these lines which is three times as much.

Let me remind you that our goal is to make high-quality communications and internet access available in all localities around the country with a population of 100 to 500 by 2030.

Importantly, this is not just about improving the quality of life. Expanding regional infrastructure will create new business opportunities, including in tourism.

Domestic tourism expanded markedly last year. According to Rosstat, in 2022 the number of Russian tourists in collective accommodation facilities grew by 16.7 percent, which, in absolute terms, amounts to almost 10 million people.

We need to more dynamically expand high-quality vacation infrastructure in our country, and think not in terms of current figures, but keep in mind that the tourist flow will continue to grow.

In this regard, I propose expanding the programme of easy-term loans for hotel projects and focusing on supporting the most popular segment which, as you are aware, is represented by three- and four-star hotels.

I also believe it is necessary to include in this programme the construction of year-round amusement parks, water parks and ski resorts. I am aware that businesses are planning or already implementing such projects in Crimea, the Far Eastern Federal District, Siberia, the Caucasus, and southern and central Russia. We will support these projects no question asked.

Also, outdoor recreation at glamping grounds is becoming increasingly popular. Last year, we allocated 4.2 billion rubles to support the construction of modular hotels which covered 174 projects in 20 regions. However, we know from practice that the demand is much higher. The investment projects have been worked through, land plots have been allocated and utility lines have been connected.

I suggest allocating an additional 11 billion rubles in the next two years to support the construction of modular hotels. This will make it possible to implement another 470 projects of this kind with almost 9,000 rooms meaning that more people will be able to learn more about our country’s unique nature and historical and cultural heritage.

The effort to develop transport corridors and logistics in Russia has helped our businesses strengthen their foreign trade ties and step-up cooperation primarily with countries in the EAEU, Asia, the Middle East and Africa, as well as Latin America.

The fifth principle is, of course, our commitment to an open economy. Despite all the challenges we faced last year, we did not go down the road of self-isolation. On the contrary, we expanded our contacts with reliable and responsible partners in the countries and regions that are driving global economic growth today. Let me reiterate that these are the markets of the future, and everyone understands this perfectly well.

In some cases, trade with countries whose leaders refuse to give in to coarse outside pressure, while prioritising their own national interests rather than those of others, increased not just by several dozen percent but by many times, and it is continuing to grow.

This proves yet again that common sense, business initiative and objective market forces outweigh politics. This also demonstrates that this ugly and de-facto neo-colonial international system no longer works, while the multipolar world order is, on the contrary, becoming stronger. This is an inevitable process.

Overall, exports of goods hit a ten-year high in 2022 at US$592 billion, with non-commodity, non-energy exports accounting for almost a third of this amount at US$188 billion. This figure supports 6.4 million jobs and generated 2.2 trillion rubles in tax revenue paid to the country’s consolidated budget.

I must mention that agricultural exports reached a new high of over US$41 billion, as I mentioned in the beginning.

Russia has been a top five grain exporter for ten years now. We have been the largest supplier of wheat to the global market since 2016. There is every reason to expect our companies to take the next step this year by setting a new record in wheat exports. In doing so, Russia will be proactive in ensuring global food security and helping countries, including in Africa, suffering from food shortages.

Overall, we had a US$22.6 billion foreign trade surplus in January-April. I am talking about the first four months, which is a bit longer than the first quarter. The current account surplus for the entire 2022 was US$233 billion.

Let me emphasise that this must be an asset for developing the Russian economy, including for importing cutting-edge equipment, technology, components and materials.

I would like the Government and the Bank of Russia to come up with specific proposals regarding the use of the proceeds from high exports to stimulate and expand investment in large and systemically important projects in infrastructure, logistics, and land development, to name a few, which will expand domestic businesses’ capabilities across the board and boost their competitiveness, including on global markets.

Of course, these markets’ operators include not only Russia’s partners and friends, but, let us face it, detractors. They are accustomed to generating super profits from their dominant and monopoly position, including political monopoly, and just do not want other countries to have an alternative to their aircraft, ships, medicines, banking systems, technology and other goods and services.

These market participants do not need competitors, so they are throwing wrenches in our plans and trying to hold back new development centres, or cancel them, in modern parlance. However, all these attempts do is cancel Western countries’ business reputation, which is a valuable asset. It appears that sometimes some people tend to forget that.

Russia has been and will remain involved in the global economy. We have drastically simplified foreign trade regulations, cut the fines for violating currency laws by orders of magnitude and, importantly, have removed them altogether in cases of unfriendly external actions. By the way, this moratorium will be renewed in 2024.

What else? At a recent meeting with representatives of the Delovaya Rossiya public business association, our colleagues bluntly raised the issue of foreign exchange amnesty. I will be upfront with you: we rarely use this approach. However, now that the violation of commitments by Western counterparties has become a routine practice, I think meeting businesses halfway on such an acute issue would be the right thing to do. I propose declaring an amnesty for business for currency violations of necessity that were committed during the moratorium and putting this issue to bed, so that later there would be no grounds for holding businesses accountable retroactively.

Next, we have introduced a fast-track VAT refund on exports, eight days now instead of three months. In conjunction with our foreign partners, we are developing new mechanisms for cross-border payments. Among other things, we will make opening a bank account in Russia for foreign companies a hassle-free procedure. Showing up in person will not be required provided, of course, that anti-money laundering legislation provisions are complied with.

I would also like to note the tangible progress in using national currencies in foreign trade – this is a separate and large issue. Today, about 90 percent of our transactions with the EAEU countries are made in rubles and over 80 percent of our transactions with China are in the ruble or the yuan.

We are dynamically developing trade in national currencies with other states as well. We are prioritising our near neighbours, as well as the BRICS and SCO countries.

In a word, we are using an entire package of instruments to support our foreign trade activities in all branches – industry, agriculture and other sectors. These are long-term instruments. We will extend them until 2030.

At the same time, we must continuously build up new instruments and improve mechanisms for supporting our exporters, making it more convenient for businesses. Of course, these businesses are now entering friendly markets, but they are new and have their own peculiarities. Naturally, the state needs to consider this and it will do so.

We need specific solutions to develop export shipment insurance and to use factoring, which will also support our producers and suppliers and provide additional guarantees for their agreements with foreign clients.

And, of course, we must promote domestic products on e-commerce platforms. Their user base, their clientele is steadily growing in both our country and the rest of the world. Hence, even small businesses can find clients there. We have room for improvement here. We are not in the lead, but we are not trailing behind many others either. We have very good, and even excellent prospects here.

I would like to ask the Government to launch a series of instruments to support e-commerce as soon as possible, and to constantly analyse the effectiveness of these instruments, primarily for small and medium companies to improve it in cooperation with business associations.

I would like to add that we have examples of our own successful e-platforms. We will support them in entering large markets like China and India and our neighbour Turkiye, to name a few. Importantly, this trade is mutually beneficial – our products will be more affordable in foreign markets while Russian customers will get a bigger choice of goods and services.

Friends and colleagues,

In the face of unprecedented challenges, Russia has not deviated from its principles of economic development – I said as much at the start. Through the joint efforts of Russian entrepreneurs including large, medium-sized and small businesses, with the active participation of the authorities, we have maintained economic stability. This is absolutely obvious by now; it is a hard fact.

Russia has kept its foothold as the most important participant in the global market. We have ensured the stable operation of entire sectors of the real economy, companies and teams, and so on, and supported the well-being of millions of Russian families.

Our key strategic and system-wide goal, both for today and for the future, is not simply to compensate for the decline in GDP or to replace foreign companies that have freed our market of their presence, or to wait out the presumably temporary fluctuations in the global economy; not at all.

I have mentioned this, friends, and I will repeat it again: the global changes now underway in all spheres of society are cardinal, profound and irreversible, and this is the important point. Under these conditions, we need to move only forward, which means that we need a proactive economic policy that can be drafted and implemented in close conjunction with representatives of the business community – with our entrepreneurs.

In fact, we are talking about transitioning to a qualitatively new level of development – a sovereign economy that not only responds to market changes and takes into account demand, but also creates this demand.

This model is often called supply-side economics, and it involves massively boosting productive forces and services, the widespread strengthening of infrastructure, the development of advanced technologies, the creation of new modern industrial facilities and entire industries, including in areas where we have not yet shown proper results, but we certainly have opportunities for this – scientific capabilities and creative potential.

Now, here is what is important for the implementation of such a model – the supply-side economic model, and here are the problems we need to solve now and in the near future.

I have already mentioned today the record-low unemployment in Russia, something we can certainly be proud of. However, this achievement has a flip side. The representatives of the companies in this room are certainly aware of this. I am referring to the difficulties with recruiting employees, with a shortage of personnel.

Therefore, in this situation, employment should be the first priority as part of the supply-side economic model, the improvement of the employment structure. We have huge reserves here – and we need to use them, and for this, we need to retrain personnel, to increase their economic activity, so that people can unlock their potential in new, growing, promising economic sectors: jobs need to be available in every city, village and region.

I would like to draw the Government’s attention to the situation in the regions where the unemployment rate is high. While the overall unemployment rate in Russia is at its all-time low, it remains quite high in certain regions. In this regard, we need to offer people more opportunities to acquire new skills, including in IT and other technology-driven sectors, as well as skills for working remotely. We need to step up our efforts in this regard.

At least ten projects of this kind will be launched as soon as next year with federal support in the regions with limited budget resources. Established by Sber, School 21 is a good example of creating educational spaces along these lines. I cannot but welcome programmes of this kind.

Moving on, we need to make sure that our universities and vocational school are result-oriented, meaning that their graduates are able to find jobs. In this context, I believe that there are at least two things we must do.

First, we must set special key performance indicators for educational institutions with graduate employment as the most important of them all. I suggest using this approach to rank vocational schools.

Second, I suggest drafting annual five-year forecasts predicting the overall demand for personnel in our economy. This way we can become more flexible in responding to the emerging trends and new needs of the labour market, while also taking into consideration our economic development priorities.

On a separate note, I would like to ask the Government to draft proposals on developing student contracts. Employers can use this instrument to enable their staff members to get an education or acquire new skills, while employees are guaranteed to get a job at a higher level of qualification. Of course, businesses must get incentives. This mechanism will require government support, among other things. I will not go into details right now, but we understand what this is all about.

Major shifts on the labour market entail higher wages. What I will now say may sound a bit odd, but I still believe that this is how it should be. I would like to turn my attention to the minimum wage. We have been indexing it above the inflation rate, making sure that the gap separating it from the subsistence rate keeps growing.

Starting January 1, 2023, the minimum wage increased 6.3 percent to 16,242 rubles per month. We will increase it again effective January 1, 2024, with an 18.5 percent adjustment in a single go. This means that after a 6.3 percent increase effective January 1, 2023, the minimum wage will increase 18.5 percent from January 1, 2024, which is way above the inflation rate and the rate at which salaries are growing across the country.

Almost five million people will benefit from this substantial increase, or 4.8 million to be more precise. By 2030, the minimum wage must double in nominal terms, which will create an additional impetus for wage increases around the country.

Here is what I would like to add, what I think is important.

We are expanding measures of social support, especially for families with children. Many of these benefits depend on whether the recipient has a job. These payments are tied to the income of the family, to a particular person’s income. If their income increases, even by a fraction, this can send them to the next bracket where their social benefits are significantly smaller or none at all. But in this situation, the person has no incentive to look for a new job or a higher salary.

We must change this situation. It should be more rewarding to work, while state support should serve as an aid, an addition to the salary, not a substitute for it. I think that you, colleagues, understand with unemployment as low as it is, this should encourage people to work. And we certainly need to look for more such incentives and improve them.

Therefore, I propose paying childcare benefits for children up to 18 months, as well as the single child benefit for the entire period they have been set for, regardless of whether family income has increased or not.

I also propose supporting parents or guardians of children with disabilities. To date, they, too, are only entitled to disabled child benefit if they do not work, if they have no other sources of income. They cannot earn extra money for the family even if they want to because they will lose the benefits they are entitled to. These restrictions need to be removed. Such people need to be able to keep their benefits package combined with part-time employment. The concept of part-time employment needs to be defined at the legislative level to avoid any discrepancies. I ask the parliament to adopt the relevant legislation as soon as possible.

The second growth point of the supply-side economy is the expansion of entrepreneurial activity. More than 28 million Russians are employed in small and medium-sized businesses. The number of self-employed Russians has doubled since January 2022, to reach 7.6 million.

It is essential to support people who want to do business and are taking first steps, including through a social contract. This system includes starting a small business, a private subsidiary farm. I think it will be right to offer people who are parties to social contracts, training at My Business centres, where they can study entrepreneurship with the government paying for the course.

I earlier proposed, at one of the previous SPIEF meetings, launching an umbrella mechanism for lending to small and medium-sized businesses, with SME Corporation providing guarantees in cases where entrepreneurs do not have enough collateral for approval of a loan. This mechanism is currently in place in all Russian regions; more than 39,000 loans worth over 350 billion rubles have been extended as part of it.

I must say that this mechanism works well. Look, in 2022, manufacturing companies received seven times more loans with such guarantees than in 2020; IT entrepreneurs obtained 46 times as many loans as in 2020.

Naturally, even more entities are in need of such loans, especially in industry, tourism and IT. Therefore, I propose enhancing this tool and extending the umbrella guarantees plan until 2030. And I ask the Government to set target limits for the volume of such lending. Mr Siluanov, I am not giving you any figures – I am asking you to consider and approve them. But this is a real tool for the development of the economy as a whole.

I also believe it is necessary to expand the scope of this measure to include what is known as the SME-plus category. The issue is about medium-sized companies which, despite certain difficulties, have grown in recent years and, according to formal criteria, such as the number of employees and revenue, are no longer in a position to apply for state support, but are in an important stage of growth and need resources. Such companies need special support measures. I would like the Government to work them out before the year end.

Also, companies that grow out of their status as small or medium-sized enterprises lose their right to preferential tax regimes, and the tax burden on them increases immediately and remains like that until they apply for benefits as large businesses.

Hence, a situation arises – I will not say anything new for this audience, as everyone understands perfectly well what I am talking about – a situation arises where there are not so many incentives to grow and to move to the next weight category. It just does not make economic sense. Therefore, companies use all kinds of tricks to stay in the small business sector, including fragmenting their businesses in order to keep these benefits. The tax service is well aware of that.

Mr President, I am not sure how it works in Algeria, but we have seen this situation for many years in Russia. I think that, in this sense, people are the same everywhere and will always find a way out of the situation that the state creates for them if they run into actual growth restrictions. The things that I said are the realities of our life.

It makes no sense to catch someone red-handed. The goal is to support growth and to remove barriers that prevent businesses from gaining strength, expanding and creating new jobs. The best way forward here is to help and to create conditions for a smooth and easy transition to another business category. I would like the Government to submit proposals on this matter at the beginning of next year, including the launch of an easy-term transitional tax regime.

Another important measure to support entrepreneurship concerns limiting the number of inspections and other oversight events. As you may remember, last year we established a moratorium on scheduled inspections of all Russian businesses, and then renewed it for 2023. For entrepreneurs whose activities are not associated with high risks of causing harm, the moratorium will be valid until 2030.

As a result, 339,000 inspections were carried out nationwide last year. This is 20 percent fewer than in the COVID-19 year of 2020, and almost five times fewer than in 2019. This is a good number, but there is a “but” to it, which I will cover shortly.

First, I think that if a business does not involve high risk of causing harm to people or the environment, it should not be inspected at all. It should be free from scheduled or unscheduled inspections. Preventive measures are quite enough.

Mr President, we arrive at these decisions as a result of our practical interaction with businesses. I apologise if I am talking too much, but perhaps you will find something useful for your country from hearing what I had to say about our life and practical work.

Next year, we will look at the implementation of what I am proposing now. Of course, I believe it is enough to limit ourselves to preventive measures, and from next year forward we will continue decreasing administrative pressure on businesses.

I would also ask those responsible to step up efforts to transform the business climate. In fact it is a system-wide project to establish a business-friendly environment in all our regions. We have made necessary contacts with business associations for this. It is their suggestions that underlie changes to regulations and it is our businesses that evaluate the effectiveness of the measures we take.

This year we have updated roadmaps in industrial construction, exports and corporate governance. I would like to ask you to make similar efforts as soon as possible in urban development, in high-tech businesses, including the use of AI, as well as in tourism and intellectual property.

Recall that in the past we used World Bank rankings to assess the ease of doing business, and I can say we made serious headway on that count. There is a lot that makes sense in that ranking, it is a good way to encourage competition, so we should not just abandon it. It is important to have our own objective criteria to put our work into perspective and assess our progress.

I therefore ask our Government together with our business community and associations, our Agency for Strategic Initiatives to develop domestic target conditions for doing business at the national level. We must draw on global experience to implement that model step by step in every region and the country as a whole.

As we develop our business climate, such sensitive issues as improving law enforcement and decriminalisation cannot be neglected.

I would like to reiterate: we need to ensure better regulation of economic activity. That means, in particular, to eliminate vague language in laws and so called ‘stretchable’ criminal laws, bringing down to a minimum the number of cases where the investigation disrupts the work of an enterprise and breaks down work teams. We have discussed this at length, and I will not go into details now. I want those colleagues from the business community that we had those discussions with to follow up on this, as we will definitely work on this.

A year back, from this rostrum, I mentioned a number of proposals in this area. Some of them have since been made into laws, other are still being considered by the Government and the parliament. I understand that it is at times difficult to find compromise, but I would ask our colleagues to move forward as fast as possible to give us coordinated solutions.

Today, I would also like to make a number of other proposals following our meetings with the Russian Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs and Delovaya Rossiya. I am referring to the standards of criminal law that have become outdated or duplicate the Code of Administrative Offences.

For over ten years we have not changed the thresholds of large and especially large property damage unrelated to embezzlement or due to violations of copyright and other rights. I would like to draw your attention to the latter because now foreign companies themselves refuse to supply software and other services. I consider it expedient to at least double these thresholds and do the same for economic crimes that do not entail deprivation of liberty – I am referring to evading the disclosure of information under securities law.

And a separate issue. I just mentioned that the number of inspections of businesses has been decreased. If you noticed, I made a small reservation. I will explain. Businesspeople are saying that now law enforcement officers have started visiting them in place of related oversight agencies. Indicatively, there are often no violations at all, but they are going to some businesses, looking for things. In some cases, their visits may be justified – in some cases.

But what is really happening? They are substituting one approach for another similar approach. We are saying there will be no inspections, but in reality there will be inspections – they will simply be held under a different name and by different people. Of course, this is undermining small businesses’ confidence in government control and oversight body reform, and it is affecting their performance. I would like to emphasise – only related departments should be conducting inspections, when they are required.

I would like to ask the Government, together with the Prosecutor General’s Office and the Interior Ministry, to strengthen this restriction in legislation and to strictly comply with it. This is very important. Otherwise, our work makes no sense. Everything should be spelled out. We need to thoroughly review this so-called legal requirement to make every word understandable.

Furthermore, business climate in Russia for both new and mature businesses should be globally competitive. As I said in my Address to the Federal Assembly, businesses in key industries and sectors, as well as companies running our biggest backbone industries must work within Russian federal jurisdiction.

Yes, of course, every businessperson has a right to dispose of his profits and property as he sees fit. This is the main goal of every business, the foundation of entrepreneurship. This is clear. There can be no doubt about this. However, a situation where money is made in Russia but then lands in foreign accounts is fraught with obvious risk. It is often unacceptable for both the state and for Russia’s businesses themselves.

Many of our businesspeople learned it first-hand when they saw their accounts and assets in the West get frozen. In fact, as we said many times, it never occurred to anyone that this was possible. It is a violation of every provision of their own and international legislation, an act of robbery where they simply closed the accounts, took everything away and are not even saying why. They do not even want to talk. It was done in a surprisingly offhand manner reminiscent of the Middle Ages.

Our people have a saying to the point: make yourself useful in the place where you were born. Therefore, I made it clear many times to our business community. Focus on investing money here. It is a safer investment, and the return is higher, no doubt about it. These investments will work in our country and in our economy and the social sphere for the benefit of our people. Not only will it benefit the country, but it is a safer investment, too.

Today, a fairly large number of domestic assets are registered with foreign companies. These assets are owned by Russian citizens who want to return to Russian jurisdiction. For them, we have launched two special administrative areas in the Primorye Territory and the Kaliningrad Region. Here, the companies can protect their assets, maintain their usual corporate governance system, and take advantage of a number of tax breaks.

I am aware that not everyone who wanted to take advantage of this opportunity was able to do so. The reasons for this vary, and some people simply did not have the time or were unable to obtain legal and accounting services abroad. However, there are also cases where our foreign partners are outright unwilling to provide this information and documents, which is nothing short of sabotage. They simply refuse to release our assets and the entrepreneurs who hold our assets.

I would like the Government to team up with the business community and to speed up the return of assets in key industries to Russian jurisdiction. The procedure for transferring businesses to Russia and registering them in special administrative areas should be made simpler in cases where such a transfer, figuratively speaking, is blocked by a foreign party or is not provided for in their legislation. This happens.

This must be done before December. A mechanism for protecting the rights of Russian citizens and legal entities that own domestic companies through what is known as foreign layers should be launched and remain operational during the same time.

Simply speaking, what is it about, and what is the problem? Someone at one time transferred something from one offshore account to another offshore account, and then to still another one. Then there were some unspecified quasi-owners and beneficiaries, and they also were covered by some offshore companies. Frankly, looking at this you may start feeling for the people who ended up in this trap. Let us think together how we can help them.

On the face of it, it looks like these are the consequences of the decisions made by certain individuals, their problems. However, we are talking about companies and enterprises that operate in Russia. Our citizens are working at these enterprises, and investments are made here as well. Therefore, owners of such businesses should have a place of their own in the Russian legal field, and, I will be blunt about it, they need our help. We will try to make it happen in a dialogue and in contact with you.

Colleagues,

The next key priority as part of supply-side economy is to ensure investment growth. We must work to boost the flow of financing to projects for making priority industrial products. Our target for this year is at least 2 trillion rubles, and by 2030, this investment should increase fivefold, to as much as 10 trillion rubles.

To this end, we have developed a whole set of tools in recent years, including the Agreement on the Protection and Promotion of Investment, special investment contracts, the Industrial Development Fund, and industrial mortgage programme.

At the end of February, we launched something called the cluster investment platform. Its participants can receive preferential loans of up to 100 billion rubles at an interest rate lower than the Central Bank key rate. These loans can be issued under the guarantee of Vnesheconombank.

Subsidies are provided for R&D [research and development projects] involving advanced technologies. Preference is given to projects that can reach mass production within three years. Last year alone, more than 160 such projects were approved, including in medium and low-tonnage chemicals, LNG and hydrogen energy.

Of course, technological sovereignty does not mean we have to provide every product and service locally – no country in the world can do this, nor does it need to, and we are not striving for this. But it is about having domestic solutions in critical areas. At the same time, it is necessary to build reliable cooperation chains and technological partnerships. In this regard, we look forward to cooperation with our colleagues from friendly countries, with partners in the EAEU, BRICS, the SCO and other associations.

We certainly need to expand the financial basis for private investment projects and to make such resources more accessible to business. The Project Financing Factory is already up and running. As many as 26 projects worth 1.8 trillion rubles are being implemented through this project financing mechanism. Among them are the construction of a mining and smelting plant in the Trans-Baikal Territory, a coal port in Primorye, fertiliser plants in Russia’s northwest and in the Far East, the construction and modernisation of airports and energy facilities. Seven more projects worth 345 billion rubles have been approved.

In short, these are the tools that businesses need. I suggest further enhancing and improving these tools, which I just mentioned, allowing projects that strengthen Russia's technological sovereignty to raise more money. The list of criteria for assessing such projects has already been approved by the Government.

We will also launch a programme of umbrella guarantees from VEB, in the amount of up to 200 billion rubles, for such projects. According to forecasts, this will reduce the interest on investment loans by about 1.5 percentage points. The procedure is as follows: once the project gets approval from the Project Financing Factory and the banks, it automatically receives a guarantee from VEB, up to a half of the project value.

And of course, we will be tapping the big potential of the Russian stock market. At a recent meeting with Delovaya Rossiya, we agreed to launch participating bonds. Apparently, these bonds can have different maturity dates up to permanent debenture. I expect the Government and the Central Bank to promptly implement the idea.

We must work on raising equity. We will launch a special mechanism with VEB’s participation which will allow banks to act as shareholders of investment projects whereby VEB will assume the bulk of the risks.

Initially, the equity fund programme will amount to 200 billion rubles. However, even this low volume will help to unblock investments of about 2 trillion rubles. We must not procrastinate here – the first projects must start as early as this summer.

Regarding outstanding corporate shares in our market, we support, as I said in the Address, placement of shares in the rapidly growing hi-tech sector. The Government is now considering the issue of tax breaks both for issuers and buyers of such securities.

A special decision was taken to give an extra backup and saturate our stock market. It covers the situation when foreign equity holders are selling Russian stock. In this case a certain part of shares in companies which change ownership must go to the Russian stock exchange.

And it is important, of course, to create incentives for an additional inflow of funds to our capital market. A major source for that is citizens’ long-term savings, there is nothing new about it. Such projects must be advocated, including within the system of insuring voluntary pension savings where the state guarantees compensation in the amount of 2,800,000 rubles. I reiterate: we must create conditions for our citizens to invest and make money at home, inside the country. Meanwhile, we are aware of cases when funds invested abroad got held up.

Another important matter. An investor in Moscow or St Petersburg can get not only a plot of land but also utility lines and a full package of tax breaks and deductions. But this is only possible in major cities and in a few other large regions – a whole number of our constituent entities are unable to provide this due to their modest budgets. Such regions obviously must be given assistance, including priority infrastructure development with support from the so-called infrastructure menu whereby emphasis must be laid on the regions with low fiscal capacity.

In addition, we need to provide an equal opportunity for the regions to incentivise new projects. What do I mean? I will try to explain.

Today, Russia’s regions can introduce an investment tax deduction to encourage new business initiatives, or the expansion or opening of new manufacturing capacity. Last year, we expanded the list of expenses for which this tax deduction is available. However, it cannot be said that the mechanism has been developed in full; there are still too few projects where it is used. The budgets of few regions can now concede some income revenue for the sake of future revenue. But it is necessary to increase the demand for investment tax deduction.

I think it would be helpful if we tailor this tool in a targeted way for new projects that strengthen the technological sovereignty of Russia, primarily in regions with limited budget opportunities.

I would like to ask the Government to work on this together with the State Council Commission on Investment, as well as business circles, so that next year we can relaunch the investment tax deduction mechanism with updated parameters. In particular, we should use long-term budget loans with favourable terms to support the regions in this area. I know there is a risk that the regions will become overburdened and debt-laden. All of this needs to be analysed.

I repeat: the main thing here is to consider the interests of business development and at the same time ensure the balance of regional budgets.

I will also add that regional government teams are playing a leading role in creating a modern business environment. Today, by tradition, I would like to mention the regions that have made the greatest progress in the National Investment Climate Ranking.

Overall, 60 regions have moved up on this rankings list. I am pleased to list them: the Chechen Republic, the Rostov, Saratov and Kostroma regions, the Yamal-Nenets Autonomous Area and the Trans-Baikal Territory showed the best dynamics. I congratulate our colleagues and also wish them success in the future.

The next area of supply-side economy is increasing the efficiency of the real sector and the services sector, as well as labour productivity in Russia by eliminating bottlenecks, eliminating losses and introducing optimal solutions. All this is described by the term “lean production.”

Since 2019, we have been implementing the Labour Productivity national project. About 5,000 enterprises are taking part, with more than 88,000 employees trained according to new advanced methods. We can see that this work is yielding results, including in the military-industrial complex; this makes it possible to quickly adjust the production capacity of weapons and military equipment.

The introduction of the principles of lean, efficient production should gain momentum, and not only in the basic sectors of the economy, but also in other sectors, in the social sphere as well. Here, it is necessary to make full use of the resources of the Federal Centre for Competencies and expand its mandate.

Another key area of the supply-side economy concerns active automation and the development of AI technology.

In Russia, the labour supply will be limited due to objective demographic processes. Under these conditions, it is extremely important for us to increase the pace of automation of the mining and manufacturing industries, agriculture, transport, logistics, trade and many other sectors.

Russia has not only huge potential but also effective solutions. Just the other day, as part of our forum, KAMAZ self-driving trucks were launched on the Neva federal highway. Yandex self-driving taxis are already operating on the streets of Moscow. These are good, but so far isolated examples, and what we need is the mass introduction of such technologies.

Let me remind you that last November we discussed measures to stimulate the introduction and production of industrial robots in Russia. We agreed that the relevant federal project will be approved by the Government before July 1. I ask you to strictly adhere to this deadline: delay here would be absolutely critical for our economy.

The next important issue is what is the so-called “data-driven governance.” This approach should be applied almost everywhere in the system of transport and communications, in medicine, education, government authorities and so on.

We need to actively implement and use these developments, support the development of domestic big data software, launch AI projects and, of course, strengthen information security, monitor the circulation of data so that it does not harm national security or the interests of our citizens. Our colleagues and I have already agreed on specific actions in this regard.

Unfortunately, we are lagging behind here – we need to make up for it and strictly adhere to the set plans in the future. In the near future we will hear a report from the Government on this issue.

Let me add that we regularly review the implementation of new technological solutions in the Russian economy and hold an annual conference dedicated to artificial intelligence. And starting this year, we are launching a new special platform – the Future Technologies Forum, where advanced areas of technological development will be discussed annually.

Companies, regions and research teams will present their developments and share their experience in mastering the latest solutions. The first forum will be held very soon – in July. Promising ideas in the field of computing and data communication will be discussed. I invite everyone to take part in it.

Technology is changing fast nowadays, and automating individual production processes is no longer enough to ensure effective growth. We must operate on a market scale. There are successful examples of working platforms in Russia, including Yandex on the taxi market – I already mentioned it – Sberbank automated lending system and Ozon e-commerce platform.

To reiterate, we need to cover more industries and institutions, and form the techno-economy of the future – an economy bolstered by institutions that operate on a whole new technological basis.

The Government and our colleagues in the regions are leveraging the platform-based principle of data-based management in their daily operations. We are among the undisputed world leaders in using innovative principles underlying the digital state, which is a cold hard fact. We need to consolidate these positions and move further.

Friends,

The format of our meeting does not allow us to cover every aspect of the supply-side economy. I think I am wearing you out going on like this, but I would like to close by saying that a thorough study of each of the areas is what the Government is tasked to do.

I mentioned earlier that the inflation level is among the key indicators that our approaches are being implemented in the correct way. It is important for us to achieve high economic growth rates and keep price dynamics close to our 4-percent target. You are aware that the Central Bank is talking about possible inflation at about 5 percent at the end of the year.

Keeping a lid on prices today is not only what the Bank of Russia was assigned to do. It is also the assessment of the Government’s performance to stimulate the growth of supply. Colleagues, please pay special attention to this.

To do so, among other things, it is important to increase the effectiveness and the return on public spending. Implementing the policy designed to promote supply-side economy and increasing the effectiveness of budget spending are the priorities that should underlie our efforts to formulate the federal budget for the next three years. We will discuss in detail the implementation of supply-side economic measures at the Strategic Development Council meeting in July.

In this regard, I would like to point out that much was said today about forming the supply-side economy. Where there is supply, there must necessarily be demand, meaning that expanding Russia's economic capabilities and potential must be directly tied in with improvements in the well-being of our people. This is what economic growth is all about.

I would like to finish where I started. The point is not only to maintain low inflation and high employment, but it is certainly also important to ensure that people's incomes grow faster.

The Russian economy should become an economy of high wages, with new requirements for the professional education system, with higher labour productivity, including through automation and innovative management systems, with high-quality modern jobs and working conditions.

I know that many – well, at least some – people believe that the high cost of labour reduces the country's global competitiveness. Obviously, they have sufficient grounds to believe that, but this opinion is becoming outdated. It is probably already obsolete and does not take into account modern realities, especially the trends of tomorrow.

If we say that high technology is the future of any economy, the Russian economy included, it will be impossible to achieve high-quality work applying high technology while using low-skilled labour. And if we need highly skilled workers, they will need to be paid for their work. Only if compensation for labour is adequate will qualified professionals work, making really high-quality products, and demand will grow, and the structure will change. This means this is the only opportunity for truly sovereign development, technological and economic leadership.

The state is trying its best to meet businesses halfway, helping them resolve the most urgent problems, including with logistics, orders and the availability of working capital. And as such, my colleagues, we can count on reciprocal steps on the part of business owners, on their social responsibility. We talk about this all the time.

I will repeat what I said at the recent congress of the Russian Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs and at the meeting with Delovaya Rossiya members. The businesses that implement long-term projects looking to strengthen Russian technological, industrial and agricultural sovereignty, should receive assistance from all levels of government. We will help companies that invest in the development of their business in Russia, that do not pump their money out, that support state investment in infrastructure, in the development of cities and territories, in environmental projects.

I would like to emphasise once again that measures of state support for the economy, industries and backbone enterprises should lead to an increase in employee wages, an improvement in their working conditions, and the expansion of social packages for the staff. I ask the Government to pay close attention to this.

Today, Russia has a packed and very ambitious economic agenda. The difficulties and challenges we are facing work as incentives for all of us, incentives to increase the pace and quality of transformations, to achieve more in improving the quality of life, prosperity and well-being of our citizens.

We will definitely continue to strengthen our sovereignty in all areas. In this work, we are certainly open to equal partnership with all countries – with all those who, like Russia, value their national interests and are ready to determine their own future.

Thank you very much. Thank you for your patience. Thank you.
